Contents
1. Good Morning! You’re Going to Die
2. The Man with the Metal Bra
3. Don’t Accept Rides from Strange Relatives
4. Seriously, the Dude Cannot Drive
5. I’ve Always Wanted to Destroy a Bridge
6. Make Way for Ducklings, or They Will Smack
You Upside the Head
7. You Look Great Without a Nose, Really
8. Mind the Gap, and Also the Hairy Guy with
the Axe
9. You Totally Want the Minibar Key
10. My Room Does Not Suck

6/1044

11. Pleased to Meet You. I Will Now Crush Your
Windpipe
12. At Least I’m Not on Goat-Chasing Duty
13. Phil the Potato Meets His Doom
14. Four Million Channels and There’s Still Nothing On Except Valkyrie Vision
15. My Blooper Video Goes Viral
16. Norns. Why Did It Have to Be Norns?
17. I Did Not Ask for Biceps
18. I Do Mighty Combat with Eggs
19. Do Not Call Me Beantown. Like, Ever
20. Come to the Dark Side. We Have Pop-Tarts
21. Gunilla Gets Blowtorched and It’s Not Funny.
Okay, It’s a Little Bit Funny
22. My Friends Fall Out of a Tree
23. I Recycle Myself

7/1044

24. You Had One Job
25. My Funeral Director Dresses Me Funny
26. Hey, I Know You’re Dead, But Call Me Maybe
27. Let’s Play Frisbee with Bladed Weapons!
28. Talk to the Face, ’Cause That’s Pretty Much
All He’s Got
29. We Are Falafel-Jacked by an Eagle
30. An Apple a Day Will Get You Killed
31. Go Smelly or Go Home
32. My Years of Playing Bassmasters 2000 Really
Pay Off
33. Sam’s Brother Wakes Up Kinda Cranky
34. My Sword Almost Ends Up on eBay
35. Thou Shalt Not Poop on the Head of Art
36. Duck!

8/1044

37. I Am Trash-Talked by a Squirrel
38. I Break Down in a Volkswagen
39. Freya Is Pretty! She Has Cats!
40. My Friend Evolved from a – Nope. I Can’t
Say It
41. Blitz Makes a Bad Deal
42. We Have a Pre-Decapitation Party, with
Spring Rolls
43. Let the Crafting of Decorative Metal Waterfowl Begin
44. Junior Wins a Bag of Tears
45. I Get to Know Jack
46. Aboard the Good Ship Toenail
47. I Psychoanalyse a Goat

9/1044

48. Hearthstone Passes Out Even More than
Jason Grace (Though I Have No Idea Who That
Is)
49. Well, There’s Your Problem. You’ve Got a
Sword Up Your Nose
50. No Spoilers. Thor Is Way Behind on His
Shows
51. We Have the Talk-About-Turning-IntoHorseflies Chat
52. I Got the Horse Right Here. His Name Is
Stanley
53. How to Kill Giants Politely
54. Why You Should Not Use a Steak Knife as a
Diving Board
55. I’m Carried into Battle by the First Dwarven
Airborne Division
56. Never Ask a Dwarf to ‘Go Long’
57. Sam Hits the EJECT Button

10/1044

58. What the Hel?
59. The Terror That Is Middle School
60. A Lovely Homicidal Sunset Cruise
61. Heather Is My New Least Favourite Flower
62. The Small Bad Wolf
63. I Hate Signing My Own Death Warrant
64. Whose Idea Was It to Make This Wolf
Unkillable?
65. I Hate This Part
66. Sacrifices
67. One More, for a Friend
68. Don’t Be a No-Bro, Bro
69. Oh … So That’s Who Fenris Smelled in
Chapter Sixty-Three
70. We Are Subjected to the PowerPoint of Doom

11/1044

71. We Burn a Swan Boat, Which I’m Pretty Sure
Is Illegal
72. I Lose a Bet
Epilogue
Glossary

Other books by Rick Riordan
The Percy Jackson series:
PERCY JACKSON AND THE LIGHTNING THIEF
PERCY JACKSON AND THE SEA OF MONSTERS
PERCY JACKSON AND THE TITAN’S CURSE
PERCY JACKSON AND THE BATTLE OF THE
LABYRINTH
PERCY JACKSON AND THE LAST OLYMPIAN
THE DEMIGOD FILES
PERCY JACKSON AND THE GREEK GODS
PERCY JACKSON AND THE GREEK HEROES

For more about Percy Jackson, try:
PERCY JACKSON: THE ULTIMATE GUIDE

13/1044

The Heroes of Olympus series:
THE LOST HERO
THE SON OF NEPTUNE
THE MARK OF ATHENA
THE HOUSE OF HADES
THE BLOOD OF OLYMPUS
THE DEMIGOD DIARIES

The Kane Chronicles series:
THE RED PYRAMID
THE THRONE OF FIRE
THE SERPENT’S SHADOW

For more about the Kane Chronicles, try:
THE KANE CHRONICLES: SURVIVAL GUIDE

Percy Jackson/Kane Chronicles Adventures
(ebooks):
THE SON OF SOBEK
THE STAFF OF SERAPIS

14/1044

THE CROWN OF PTOLEMY

www.rickriordan.co.uk

To Cassandra Clare
Thanks for letting me share the excellent
name Magnus

ONE

Good Morning! You’re
Going to Die

Yeah, I know. You guys are going to read
about how I died in agony, and you’re going
be like, ‘Wow! That sounds cool, Magnus!
Can I die in agony, too?’
No. Just no.
Don’t go jumping off any rooftops. Don’t
run into the highway or set yourself on fire.
It doesn’t work that way. You will not end up
where I ended up.
Besides, you wouldn’t want to deal with
my situation. Unless you’ve got some crazy

18/1044

desire to see undead warriors hacking one
another to pieces, swords flying up giants’
noses and dark elves in snappy outfits, you
shouldn’t even think about finding the wolfheaded doors.
My name is Magnus Chase. I’m sixteen
years old. This is the story of how my life
went downhill after I got myself killed.
My day started out normal enough. I was
sleeping on the sidewalk under a bridge in
the Public Garden when a guy kicked me
awake and said, ‘They’re after you.’
By the way, I’ve been homeless for the past
two years.
Some of you may think, Aw, how sad. Others may think, Ha, ha, loser! But, if you saw
me on the street, ninety-nine per cent of you
would walk right past like I’m invisible.
You’d pray, Don’t let him ask me for money.
You’d wonder if I’m older than I look,

19/1044

because surely a teenager wouldn’t be
wrapped in a stinky old sleeping bag, stuck
outside in the middle of a Boston winter.
Somebody should help that poor boy!
Then you’d keep walking.
Whatever. I don’t need your sympathy. I’m
used to being laughed at. I’m definitely used
to being ignored. Let’s move on.
The bum who woke me was a guy called
Blitz. As usual, he looked like he’d been running through a dirty hurricane. His wiry
black hair was full of paper scraps and twigs.
His face was the colour of saddle leather and
was flecked with ice. His beard curled in all
directions. Snow caked the bottom of his
trench coat where it dragged around his feet
– Blitz being about five feet five – and his
eyes were so dilated the irises were all pupil.
His permanently alarmed expression made
him look like he might start screaming any
second.

20/1044

I blinked the gunk out of my eyes. My
mouth tasted like day-old hamburger. My
sleeping bag was warm, and I really didn’t
want to get out of it.
‘Who’s after me?’
‘Not sure.’ Blitz rubbed his nose, which
had been broken so many times it zigzagged
like a lightning bolt. ‘They’re handing out flyers with your name and picture.’
I cursed. Random police and park rangers
I could deal with. Truant officers,
community-service volunteers, drunken college kids, addicts looking to roll somebody
small and weak – all those would’ve been as
easy to wake up to as pancakes and orange
juice.
But when somebody knew my name and
my face – that was bad. That meant they
were targeting me specifically. Maybe the
folks at the shelter were mad at me for
breaking their stereo. (Those Christmas

21/1044

carols had been driving me crazy.) Maybe a
security camera had caught that last bit of
pickpocketing I did in the Theater District.
(Hey, I needed money for pizza.) Or maybe,
unlikely as it seemed, the police were still
looking for me, wanting to ask questions
about my mom’s murder …
I packed my stuff, which took about three
seconds. The sleeping bag rolled up tight and
fitted in my backpack with my toothbrush
and a change of socks and underwear. Except for the clothes on my back, that’s all I
owned. With the backpack over my shoulder
and the hood of my jacket pulled low, I could
blend in with pedestrian traffic pretty well.
Boston was full of college kids. Some of them
were even more scraggly and younger-looking than me.
I turned to Blitz. ‘Where’d you see these
people with the flyers?’

22/1044

‘Beacon Street. They’re coming this way.
Middle-aged white guy and a teenage girl,
probably his daughter.’
I frowned. ‘That makes no sense. Who –’
‘I don’t know, kid, but I gotta go.’ Blitz
squinted at the sunrise, which was turning
the skyscraper windows orange. For reasons
I’d never quite understood, Blitz hated the
daylight. Maybe he was the world’s shortest,
stoutest homeless vampire. ‘You should go
see Hearth. He’s hanging out in Copley
Square.’
I tried not to feel irritated. The local street
people jokingly called Hearth and Blitz my
mom and dad because one or the other always seemed to be hovering around me.
‘I appreciate it,’ I said. ‘I’ll be fine.’
Blitz chewed his thumbnail. ‘I dunno, kid.
Not today. You gotta be extra careful.’
‘Why?’

23/1044

He glanced over my shoulder. ‘They’re
coming.’
I didn’t see anybody. When I turned back,
Blitz was gone.
I hated it when he did that. Just – Poof.
The guy was like a ninja. A homeless vampire
ninja.
Now I had a choice: go to Copley Square
and hang out with Hearth, or head towards
Beacon Street and try to spot the people who
were looking for me.
Blitz’s description of them made me curious. A middle-aged white guy and a teenage
girl searching for me at sunrise on a bittercold morning. Why? Who were they?
I crept along the edge of the pond. Almost
nobody took the lower trail under the bridge.
I could hug the side of the hill and spot anyone approaching on the higher path without
them seeing me.

24/1044

Snow coated the ground. The sky was eyeachingly blue. The bare tree branches looked
like they’d been dipped in glass. The wind
cut through my layers of clothes, but I didn’t
mind the cold. My mom used to joke that I
was half polar bear.
Dammit, Magnus, I chided myself.
After two years, my memories of her were
still a minefield. I’d stumble over one, and
instantly my composure would be blown to
bits.
I tried to focus.
The man and the girl were coming this
way. The man’s sandy hair grew over his collar – not like an intentional style, but like he
couldn’t be bothered to cut it. His baffled expression reminded me of a substitute teacher’s: I know I was hit by a spit wad, but I
have no idea where it came from. His smart
shoes were totally wrong for a Boston winter.
His socks were different shades of brown.

25/1044

His tie looked like it had been tied while he
spun around in total darkness.
The girl was definitely his daughter. Her
hair was just as thick and wavy, though lighter blonde. She was dressed more sensibly in
snow boots, jeans and a parka, with an
orange T-shirt peeking out at the neckline.
Her expression was more determined, angry.
She gripped a sheaf of flyers like they were
essays she’d been graded on unfairly.
If she was looking for me, I did not want to
be found. She was scary.
I didn’t recognize her or her dad, but
something tugged at the back of my skull …
like a magnet trying to pull out a very old
memory.
Father and daughter stopped where the
path forked. They looked around as if just
now realizing they were standing in the
middle of a deserted park at no-thank-you
o’clock in the dead of winter.

26/1044

‘Unbelievable,’ said the girl. ‘I want to
strangle him.’
Assuming she meant me, I hunkered down
a little more.
Her dad sighed. ‘We should probably avoid
killing him. He is your uncle.’
‘But two years?’ the girl demanded. ‘Dad,
how could he not tell us for two years?’
‘I can’t explain Randolph’s actions. I never
could, Annabeth.’
I inhaled so sharply that I was afraid they
would hear me. A scab was ripped off my
brain, exposing raw memories from when I
was six years old.
Annabeth. Which meant the sandy-haired
man was … Uncle Frederick?
I flashed back to the last family Thanksgiving we’d shared: Annabeth and me hiding in
the library at Uncle Randolph’s town house,
playing with dominoes while the adults
yelled at each other downstairs.

27/1044

You’re lucky you live with your momma.
Annabeth stacked another domino on her
miniature building. It was amazingly good,
with columns in front like a temple. I’m going to run away.
I had no doubt she meant it. I was in awe
of her confidence.
Then Uncle Frederick appeared in the
doorway. His fists were clenched. His grim
expression was at odds with the smiling
reindeer on his sweater. Annabeth, we’re
leaving.
Annabeth looked at me. Her grey eyes
were a little too fierce for a first-grader’s. Be
safe, Magnus.
With a flick of her finger, she knocked over
her domino temple.
That was the last time I’d seen her.
Afterwards, my mom had been adamant:
We’re staying away from your uncles.

28/1044

Especially Randolph. I won’t give him what
he wants. Ever.
She wouldn’t explain what Randolph
wanted, or what she and Frederick and Randolph had argued about.
You have to trust me, Magnus. Being
around them … it’s too dangerous.
I trusted my mom. Even after her death, I
hadn’t had any contact with my relatives.
Now, suddenly, they were looking for me.
Randolph lived in town, but, as far as I
knew, Frederick and Annabeth still lived in
Virginia. Yet here they were, passing out flyers with my name and photo on them. Where
had they even got a photo of me?
My head buzzed so badly that I missed
some of their conversation.
‘– to find Magnus,’ Uncle Frederick was
saying. He checked his smartphone. ‘Randolph is at the city shelter in the South End.

29/1044

He says no luck. We should try the youth
shelter across the park.’
‘How do we even know Magnus is alive?’
Annabeth asked miserably. ‘Missing for two
years? He could be frozen in a ditch
somewhere!’
Part of me was tempted to jump out of my
hiding place and shout, TA-DA!
Even though it had been ten years since I’d
seen Annabeth, I didn’t like seeing her distressed. But after so long on the streets I’d
learned the hard way: you never walk into a
situation until you understand what’s going
on.
‘Randolph is sure Magnus is alive,’ said
Uncle Frederick. ‘He’s somewhere in Boston.
If his life is truly in danger …’
They set off towards Charles Street, their
voices carried away by the wind.
I was shivering now, but it wasn’t from the
cold. I wanted to run after Frederick, tackle

30/1044

him and demand to hear what was going on.
How did Randolph know I was still in town?
Why were they looking for me? How was my
life in danger now more than on any other
day?
But I didn’t follow them.
I remembered the last thing my mom ever
told me. I’d been reluctant to use the fire escape, reluctant to leave her, but she’d
gripped my arms and made me look at her.
Magnus, run. Hide. Don’t trust anyone. I’ll
find you. Whatever you do, don’t go to Randolph for help.
Then, before I’d made it out of the window, the door of our apartment had burst into splinters. Two pairs of glowing blue eyes
had emerged from the darkness …
I shook off the memory and watched Uncle
Frederick and Annabeth walk away, veering
east towards the Common.

31/1044

Uncle Randolph … For some reason, he’d
contacted Frederick and Annabeth. He’d got
them to Boston. All this time, Frederick and
Annabeth hadn’t known that my mom was
dead and I was missing. It seemed impossible, but, if it were true, why would Randolph tell them about it now?
Without confronting him directly, I could
think of only one way to get answers. His
town house was in Back Bay, an easy walk
from here. According to Frederick, Randolph
wasn’t home. He was somewhere in the
South End, looking for me.
Since nothing started a day better than a
little breaking and entering, I decided to pay
his place a visit.

TWO

The Man with the Metal
Bra

The family mansion sucked.
Oh, sure, you wouldn’t think so. You’d see
the massive six-storey brownstone with gargoyles on the corners of the roof, stainedglass transom windows, marble front steps
and all the other blah, blah, blah, richpeople-live-here details, and you’d wonder
why I’m sleeping on the streets.
Two words: Uncle Randolph.
It was his house. As the oldest son, he’d inherited it from my grandparents, who died

34/1044

before I was born. I never knew much about
the family soap opera, but there was a lot of
bad blood between the three kids: Randolph,
Frederick and my mom. After the Great
Thanksgiving Schism, we never visited the
ancestral homestead again. Our apartment
was, like, half a mile away, but Randolph
might as well have lived on Mars.
My mom only mentioned him if we
happened to be driving past the brownstone.
Then she would point it out the way you
might point out a dangerous cliff. See? There
it is. Avoid it.
After I started living on the streets, I
would sometimes walk by at night. I’d peer
in the windows and see glowing display cases
of antique swords and axes, creepy helmets
with face masks staring at me from the walls,
statues silhouetted in the upstairs windows
like petrified ghosts.

35/1044

Several times I considered breaking in to
poke around, but I’d never been tempted to
knock on the door. Please, Uncle Randolph, I
know you hated my mother and haven’t
seen me in ten years; I know you care more
about your rusty old collectibles than you do
about your family, but may I live in your
fine house and eat your leftover crusts of
bread?
No thanks. I’d rather be on the street,
eating day-old falafel from the food court.
Still … I figured it would be simple enough
to break in, look around and see if I could
find answers about what was going on. While
I was there, maybe I could grab some stuff to
pawn.
Sorry if that offends your sense of right
and wrong.
Oh, wait. No, I’m not.
I don’t steal from just anybody. I choose
obnoxious jerks who have too much already.

36/1044

If you’re driving a new BMW and you park it
in a disabled spot without a permit, then,
yeah, I’ve got no problem jimmying your
window and taking some change from your
cupholder. If you’re coming out of Barneys
with your bag of silk handkerchiefs, so busy
talking on your phone and pushing people
out of your way that you’re not paying attention, I am there for you, ready to pickpocket
your wallet. If you can afford five thousand
dollars to blow your nose, you can afford to
buy me dinner.
I am judge, jury and thief. And, as far as
obnoxious jerks went, I figured I couldn’t do
better than Uncle Randolph.
The house fronted Commonwealth Avenue. I headed around back to the poetically
named Public Alley 429. Randolph’s parking
spot was empty. Stairs led down to the basement entrance. If there was a security system, I couldn’t spot it. The door was a simple

37/1044

latch lock without even a deadbolt. Come on,
Randolph. At least make it a challenge.
Two minutes later I was inside.
In the kitchen, I helped myself to some
sliced turkey, crackers and milk from the
carton. No falafel. Dammit. Now I was really
in the mood for some, but I found a chocolate bar and stuffed it in my coat pocket for
later. (Chocolate must be savoured, not
rushed.) Then I headed upstairs into a
mausoleum of mahogany furniture, oriental
rugs, oil paintings, marble-tiled floors and
crystal chandeliers … It was just embarrassing. Who lives like this?
At age six, I couldn’t appreciate how expensive all this stuff was, but my general impression of the mansion was the same: dark,
oppressive, creepy. It was hard to imagine
my mom growing up here. It was easy to understand why she’d become a fan of the great
outdoors.

38/1044

Our apartment over the Korean BBQ joint
in Allston had been cosy enough, but Mom
never liked being inside. She always said her
real home was the Blue Hills. We used to go
hiking and camping there in all kinds of
weather – fresh air, no walls or ceilings, no
company but the ducks, geese and squirrels.
This brownstone, by comparison, felt like a
prison. As I stood alone in the foyer, my skin
crawled with invisible beetles.
I climbed to the next floor. The library
smelled of lemon polish and leather, just like
I remembered. Along one wall was a lit glass
case full of Randolph’s rusty Viking helmets
and corroded axe blades. My mom once told
me that Randolph taught history at Harvard
before some big disgrace got him fired. She
wouldn’t go into details, but clearly the guy
was still an artefact nut.

39/1044

You’re smarter than either of your uncles,
Magnus, my mom once told me. With your
grades, you could easily get into Harvard.
That had been back when she was still
alive, I was still in school, and I might have
had a future that extended past finding my
next meal.
In one corner of Randolph’s office sat a big
slab of rock like a tombstone, the front chiselled and painted with elaborate red swirly
designs. In the centre was a crude drawing of
a snarling beast – maybe a lion or a wolf.
I shuddered. Let’s not think about wolves.
I approached Randolph’s desk. I’d been
hoping for a computer, or a notepad with
helpful information – anything to explain
why they were looking for me. Instead,
spread across the desk were pieces of parchment as thin and yellow as onion skin. They
looked like maps a school kid in medieval
times had made for social studies: faint

40/1044

sketches of a coastline, various points labelled in an alphabet I didn’t know. Sitting
on top of them, like a paperweight, was a
leather pouch.
My breath caught. I recognized that pouch.
I untied the drawstring and grabbed one of
the dominoes … except it wasn’t a domino.
My six-year-old self had assumed that’s what
Annabeth and I had been playing with. Over
the years, the memory had reinforced itself.
But, instead of dots, these stones were
painted with red symbols.
The one in my hand was shaped like a tree
branch or a deformed F:

My heart pounded. I wasn’t sure why. I
wondered if coming here had been such a
good idea. The walls felt like they were closing in. On the big rock in the corner, the

41/1044

drawing of the beast seemed to sneer at me,
its red outline glistening like fresh blood.
I moved to the window. I thought it might
help to look outside. Along the centre of the
avenue stretched the Commonwealth Mall –
a ribbon of parkland covered in snow. The
bare trees were strung with white Christmas
lights. At the end of the block, inside an iron
fence, the bronze statue of Leif Erikson stood
on his pedestal, his hand cupped over his
eyes. Leif gazed towards the Charlesgate
overpass as if to say, Look, I discovered a
highway!
My mom and I used to joke about Leif. His
armour was on the skimpy side: a short skirt
and a breastplate that looked like a Viking
bra.
I had no clue why that statue was in the
middle of Boston, but I figured it couldn’t be
a coincidence that Uncle Randolph grew up
to study Vikings. He’d lived here his whole

42/1044

life. He’d probably looked at Leif every day
out of the window. Maybe as a child Randolph had thought, Someday, I want to
study Vikings. Men who wear metal bras
are cool!
My eyes drifted to the base of the statue.
Somebody was standing there … looking up
at me.
You know how when you see somebody
out of context and it takes you a second to recognize them? In Leif Erikson’s shadow
stood a tall, pale man in a black leather jacket, black motorcycle pants and pointy-toed
boots. His short, spiky hair was so blond it
was almost white. His only dash of colour
was a striped red-and-white scarf wrapped
around his neck and spilling off his
shoulders like a melted candy cane.
If I didn’t know him, I might’ve guessed he
was cosplaying some anime character. But I

43/1044

did know him. It was Hearth, my fellow
homeless dude and surrogate ‘mom’.
I was a little creeped out, a little offended.
Had he seen me on the street and followed
me? I didn’t need some fairy god-stalker
looking after me.
I spread my hands: What are you doing
here?
Hearth made a gesture like he was plucking something from his cupped hand and
throwing it away. After two years of hanging
around him, I was getting pretty good at
reading sign language.
He was saying GET OUT.
He didn’t look alarmed, but it was hard to
tell with Hearth. He never showed much
emotion. Whenever we hung out, he mostly
just stared at me with those pale grey eyes
like he was waiting for me to explode.

44/1044

I lost valuable seconds trying to figure out
what he meant, why he was here when he
was supposed to be in Copley Square.
He gestured again: both hands pointing
forward with two fingers, dipping up and
down twice. Hurry.
‘Why?’ I said aloud.
Behind me, a deep voice said, ‘Hello,
Magnus.’
I nearly jumped out of my shoes. Standing
in the library doorway was a barrel-chested
man with a trim white beard and a skullcap
of grey hair. He wore a beige cashmere overcoat over a dark wool suit. His gloved hands
gripped the handle of a polished wooden
cane with an iron tip. Last time I’d seen him
his hair had been black, but I knew that
voice.
‘Randolph.’
He inclined his head a millimetre. ‘What a
pleasant surprise. I’m glad you’re here.’ He

45/1044

sounded neither surprised nor glad. ‘We
don’t have much time.’
The food and milk started to churn in my
stomach. ‘M-much time … before what?’
His brow furrowed. His nose wrinkled as if
he detected a mildly unpleasant odour.
‘You’re sixteen today, aren’t you? They’ll be
coming to kill you.’

THREE

Don’t Accept Rides from
Strange Relatives

Well, happy birthday to me!
Was it 13 January? Honestly, I had no
idea. Time flies when you’re sleeping under
bridges and eating from dumpsters.
So I was officially sixteen. For my present,
I got cornered by Uncle Freaky, who announced that I was marked for assassination.
‘Who –’ I started to ask. ‘You know what?
Never mind. Nice seeing you, Randolph. I’ll
be going now.’

48/1044

Randolph remained in the doorway, blocking my exit. He pointed the iron tip of his
cane at me. I swear I could feel it pushing
against my sternum from across the room.
‘Magnus, we need to talk. I don’t want
them to get to you. Not after what happened
to your mother …’
A punch in the face would’ve been less
painful.
Memories from that night spun through
my head like a sickening kaleidoscope: our
apartment building shuddering, a scream
from the floor below, my mother – who’d
been tense and paranoid all day – dragging
me towards the fire escape, telling me to run.
The door splintered and burst. From the
hallway, two beasts emerged, their pelts the
colour of dirty snow, their eyes glowing blue.
My fingers slipped off the fire-escape railing
and I fell, landing in a pile of garbage bags in

49/1044

the alley. Moments later, the windows of our
apartment exploded, belching fire.
My mom had told me to run. I did. She’d
promised to find me. She never did. Later,
on the news, I heard that her body had been
recovered from the fire. The police were
searching for me. They had questions: signs
of arson; my record of disciplinary problems
at school; neighbours’ reports of shouting
and a loud crash from our apartment just before the explosion; the fact that I’d run from
the scene. None of the reports mentioned
wolves with glowing eyes.
Ever since that night I’d been hiding, living under the radar, too busy surviving to
grieve properly for my mom, wondering if I’d
hallucinated those beasts … but I knew I
hadn’t.
Now, after all this time, Uncle Randolph
wanted to help me.

50/1044

I gripped the little domino stone so tightly
it cut into my palm. ‘You don’t know what
happened to my mom. You never cared
about either of us.’
Randolph lowered his cane. He leaned on
it heavily and stared at the carpet. I could almost believe I’d hurt his feelings.
‘I pleaded with your mother,’ he said. ‘I
wanted her to bring you here – to live where
I could protect you. She refused. After she
died …’ He shook his head. ‘Magnus, you
have no idea how long I’ve looked for you, or
how much danger you’re in.’
‘I’m fine,’ I snapped, though my heart was
thumping against my ribs. ‘I’ve been taking
care of myself pretty well.’
‘Perhaps, but those days are over.’ The certainty in Randolph’s voice gave me a chill.
‘You’re sixteen now, the age of manhood.
You escaped them once, the night your
mother died. They won’t let you escape

51/1044

again. This is our last chance. Let me help
you, or you won’t live through the day.’
The low winter light shifted across the
stained-glass transom, washing Randolph’s
face in changing colours, chameleon-style.
I shouldn’t have come here. Stupid, stupid,
stupid. Over and over, my mom had given
me one clear message: Don’t go to Randolph.
Yet here I was.
The longer I listened to him, the more terrified I got, and the more desperately I
wanted to hear what he had to say.
‘I don’t need your help.’ I set the strange
little domino on the desk. ‘I don’t want –’
‘I know about the wolves.’
That stopped me.
‘I know what you saw,’ he continued. ‘I
know who sent the creatures. Regardless of
what the police think, I know how your
mother really died.’
‘How –’

52/1044

‘Magnus, there’s so much I need to tell you
about your parents, about your inheritance
… About your father.’
An ice-cold wire threaded its way down my
spine. ‘You knew my father?’
I didn’t want to give Randolph any leverage. Living on the street had taught me how
dangerous leverage could be. But he had me
hooked. I needed to hear this information.
Judging from the appraising gleam in his
eyes, he knew it.
‘Yes, Magnus. Your father’s identity, your
mother’s murder, the reason she refused my
help … it’s all connected.’ He gestured towards his display of Viking goodies. ‘My
whole life, I’ve been working towards one
goal. I’ve been trying to solve a historical
mystery. Until recently, I didn’t see the
whole picture. Now I do. It’s all been leading
to this day, your sixteenth birthday.’

53/1044

I backed up to the window, as far as I
could get from Uncle Randolph. ‘Look, I
don’t understand ninety per cent of what
you’re saying, but if you can tell me about my
dad –’
The building rattled like a volley of cannons had gone off in the distance – a rumble
so low I felt it in my teeth.
‘They’ll be here soon,’ Randolph warned.
‘We’re running out of time.’
‘Who are they?’
Randolph limped forward, relying on his
cane. His right knee didn’t seem to work.
‘I’m asking a lot, Magnus. You have no reason to trust me. But you need to come with
me right now. I know where your birthright
is.’ He pointed to the old maps on the desk.
‘Together, we can retrieve what is yours. It’s
the only thing that might protect you.’
I glanced over my shoulder, out of the window. Down in the Commonwealth Mall,

54/1044

Hearth had disappeared. I should have done
the same. Looking at Uncle Randolph, I tried
to see any resemblance to my mother, anything that might inspire me to trust him. I
found nothing. His imposing bulk, his intense dark eyes, his humourless face and stiff
manner … he was the exact opposite of my
mom.
‘My car is out back,’ he said.
‘M-maybe we should wait for Annabeth
and Uncle Frederick.’
Randolph grimaced. ‘They don’t believe
me. They never believed me. Out of desperation, as a last resort, I brought them to Boston to help me look for you, but now that
you’re here –’
The building shook again. This time the
boom felt closer and stronger. I wanted to
believe it was from construction nearby, or a
military ceremony, or anything easily explainable. But my gut told me otherwise. The

55/1044

noise sounded like the fall of a gargantuan
foot – like the noise that had shaken our
apartment two years ago.
‘Please, Magnus.’ Randolph’s voice
quavered. ‘I lost my own family to those
monsters. I lost my wife, my daughters.’
‘You – you had a family? My mom never
said anything –’
‘No, she wouldn’t have. But your mother …
Natalie was my only sister. I loved her. I
hated to lose her. I can’t lose you, too. Come
with me. Your father left something for you
to find – something that will change the
worlds.’
Too many questions crowded my brain. I
didn’t like the crazy light in Randolph’s eyes.
I didn’t like the way he said worlds, plural.
And I didn’t believe he’d been trying to find
me since my mom died. I had my antenna up
constantly. If Randolph had been asking
about me by name, one of my street friends

56/1044

would’ve tipped me off, like Blitz had done
this morning with Annabeth and Frederick.
Something had changed – something that
made Randolph decide I was worth looking
for.
‘What if I just run?’ I asked. ‘Will you try
to stop me?’
‘If you run, they’ll find you. They’ll kill
you.’
My throat felt like it was full of cotton
balls. I didn’t trust Randolph. Unfortunately,
I believed he was in earnest about people trying to kill me. His voice had the ring of truth.
‘Well, then,’ I said, ‘let’s go for a ride.’

FOUR

Seriously, the Dude
Cannot Drive

You’ve heard about bad Boston drivers?
That’s my Uncle Randolph.
The dude gunned his BMW 528i (of course
it had to be a BMW) and shot down Commonwealth Avenue, ignoring the lights,
honking at other cars, weaving randomly
from lane to lane.
‘You missed a pedestrian,’ I said. ‘You
want to go back and hit her?’
Randolph was too distracted to answer. He
kept glancing at the sky as if looking for

59/1044

storm clouds. He gunned the BMW through
the intersection at Exeter.
‘So,’ I said, ‘where are we going?’
‘The bridge.’
That explained everything. There were,
like, twenty bridges in the Boston area.
I ran my hand along the heated leather
seat. It had been maybe six months since I’d
ridden in a car. The last time it had been a
social worker’s Toyota. Before that, a police
cruiser. Both times I’d used a fake name.
Both times I’d escaped, but over the past two
years I’d come to equate cars with holding
cells. I wasn’t sure my luck had changed any
today.
I waited for Randolph to answer any of the
nagging little questions I had, like, oh: Who’s
my dad? Who murdered my mom? How did
you lose your wife and kids? Are you
presently hallucinating? Did you really have
to wear that clove-scented cologne?

60/1044

But he was too busy causing traffic havoc.
Finally, just to make small talk, I asked,
‘So who’s trying to kill me?’
He turned right on Arlington. We skirted
the Public Garden, past the equestrian statue
of George Washington, the rows of gaslight
lamp posts and snow-covered hedges. I was
tempted to bail out of the car, run back to the
swan pond and hide in my sleeping bag.
‘Magnus,’ said Randolph, ‘I’ve made my
life’s work studying the Norse exploration of
North America.’
‘Wow, thanks,’ I said. ‘That really
answered my question.’
Suddenly Randolph did remind me of my
mom. He gave me the same exasperated
scowl, the same look over the top of his
glasses, like, Please, kid, cut the sarcasm.
The similarity made my chest ache.
‘Fine,’ I said. ‘I’ll humour you. Norse exploration. You mean the Vikings.’

61/1044

Randolph winced. ‘Well … Viking means
raider. It’s more of a job description. Not all
Norse people were Vikings. But, yes, those
guys.’
‘The statue of Leif Erikson … Does that
mean the Vikings – er, the Norse – discovered Boston? I thought the Pilgrims did
that.’
‘I could give you a three-hour lecture on
that topic alone.’
‘Please don’t.’
‘Suffice it to say, the Norse explored North
America and even built settlements around
the year 1000, almost five hundred years before Christopher Columbus. Scholars agree
on that.’
‘That’s a relief. I hate it when scholars
disagree.’
‘But no one is sure how far south the Norse
sailed. Did they make it to what is now the
United States? That statue of Leif Erikson …

62/1044

that was the pet project of a wishful thinker
in the 1800s, a man named Eben Horsford.
He was convinced that Boston was the lost
Norse settlement of Norumbega, their furthest point of exploration. He had an instinct, a gut feeling, but no real proof. Most
historians wrote him off as a crackpot.’
He looked at me meaningfully.
‘Let me guess … you don’t think he’s a
crackpot.’ I resisted the urge to say, Takes
one to believe one.
‘Those maps on my desk,’ Randolph said.
‘They are the proof. My colleagues call them
forgeries, but they’re not. I staked my reputation on it!’
And that’s why you got fired from Harvard, I thought.
‘The Norse explorers did make it this far,’
he continued. ‘They were searching for
something … and they found it here. One of
their ships sank nearby. For years I thought

63/1044

the shipwreck was in Massachusetts Bay. I
sacrificed everything to find it. I bought my
own boat, took my wife, my children on expeditions. The last time …’ His voice broke.
‘The storm came out of nowhere, the fires …’
He didn’t seem anxious to share more, but
I got the general idea: he’d lost his family at
sea. He really had staked everything on his
crazy theory about Vikings in Boston.
I felt bad for the guy, sure. I also didn’t
want to be his next casualty.
We stopped at the corner of Boylston and
Charles.
‘Maybe I’ll just get out here.’ I tried the
handle. The door was locked from the
driver’s side.
‘Magnus, listen. It’s no accident you were
born in Boston. Your father wanted you to
find what he lost two thousand years ago.’
My feet got jumpy. ‘Did you just say … two
thousand years?’

64/1044

‘Give or take.’
I considered screaming and pounding on
the window. Would anybody help me? If I
could get out of the car, maybe I could find
Uncle Frederick and Annabeth, assuming
they were any less insane than Randolph.
We turned onto Charles Street, heading
north between the Public Garden and the
Common. Randolph could’ve been taking me
anywhere – Cambridge, the North End, or
some out-of-the-way body dump.
I tried to keep calm. ‘Two thousand years
… that’s a longer lifespan than your average
dad.’
Randolph’s face reminded me of the Man
in the Moon from old black-and-white cartoons: pale and rotund, pitted and scarred,
with a secretive smile that wasn’t very
friendly. ‘Magnus, what do you know about
Norse mythology?’
This just gets better and better, I thought.

65/1044

‘Uh, not much. My mom had a picture
book she used to read me when I was little.
And weren’t there a couple of movies about
Thor?’
Randolph shook his head in disgust.
‘Those movies … ridiculously inaccurate. The
real gods of Asgard – Thor, Loki, Odin and
the rest – are much more powerful, much
more terrifying than anything Hollywood
could concoct.’
‘But … they’re myths. They’re not real.’
Randolph gave me a sort of pitying look.
‘Myths are simply stories about truths we’ve
forgotten.’
‘So, look, I just remembered I have an appointment down the street –’
‘A millennium ago, Norse explorers came
to this land.’ Randolph drove us past the
Cheers bar on Beacon Street, where bundledup tourists were taking photos of themselves
in front of the sign. I spotted a crumpled

66/1044

flyer skittering across the sidewalk: it had
the word MISSING and an old picture of me.
One of the tourists stepped on it.
‘The captain of these explorers,’ Randolph
continued, ‘was a son of the god Skirnir.’
‘A son of a god. Really, anywhere around
here is good. I can walk.’
‘This man carried a very special item,’
Randolph said, ‘something that once belonged to your father. When the Norse ship
went down in a storm, that item was lost. But
you – you have the ability to find it.’
I tried the door again. Still locked.
The really bad part? The more Randolph
talked, the less I could convince myself that
he was nuts. His story seeped into my mind
– storms, wolves, gods, Asgard. The words
clicked into place like pieces of a puzzle I’d
never had the courage to finish. I was starting to believe him, and that scared the baked
beans out of me.

67/1044

Randolph whipped around the access road
for Storrow Drive. He parked at a meter on
Cambridge Street. To the north, past the elevated tracks of the Mass General T station,
rose the stone towers of the Longfellow
Bridge.
‘That’s where we’re going?’ I asked.
Randolph fished for quarters in his cupholder. ‘All these years, it was so much
closer than I realized. I just needed you!’
‘I’m definitely feeling the love.’
‘You are sixteen today.’ Randolph’s eyes
danced with excitement. ‘It’s the perfect day
for you to reclaim your birthright. But it’s
also what your enemies have been waiting
for. We have to find it first.’
‘But –’
‘Trust me a little while longer, Magnus.
Once we have the weapon –’
‘Weapon? Now my birthright is a
weapon?’

68/1044

‘Once you have it in your possession, you’ll
be much safer. I can explain everything to
you. I can help you train for what’s to come.’
He opened his car door. Before he could
get out, I grabbed his wrist.
I usually avoid touching people. Physical
contact creeps me out. But I needed his full
attention.
‘Give me one answer,’ I said. ‘One clear
answer, without the rambling and the history
lectures. You said you knew my dad. Who is
he?’
Randolph placed his hand over mine,
which made me squirm. His palm was too
rough and calloused for a history professor’s.
‘On my life, Magnus, I swear this is the truth:
your father is a Norse god. Now, hurry.
We’re in a twenty-minute parking spot.’

FIVE

I’ve Always Wanted to
Destroy a Bridge

‘You can’t drop a bombshell like that and
walk away!’ I yelled as Randolph walked
away.
Despite his cane and his stiff leg, the guy
could really move. He was like an Olympic
gold medallist in hobbling. He forged ahead,
climbing the sidewalk of the Longfellow
Bridge as I jogged after him, the wind
screaming in my ears.
The morning commuters were coming in
from Cambridge. A single line of cars was

71/1044

backed up the length of the span, barely
moving. You’d think my uncle and I would
be the only ones dumb enough to walk across
the bridge in sub-zero weather, but, this being Boston, half a dozen runners were chugging along, looking like emaciated seals in
their Lycra bodysuits. A mom with two kids
bundled in a stroller was walking on the opposite sidewalk. Her kids looked about as
happy as I felt.
My uncle was still fifteen feet ahead of me.
‘Randolph!’ I called. ‘I’m talking to you!’
‘The drift of the river,’ he muttered. ‘The
landfill on the banks … allowing for a thousand years of shifting tidal patterns –’
‘Yo!’ I caught the sleeve of his cashmere
coat. ‘Rewind to the part about a Norse god
being my pappy.’
Randolph scanned our surroundings. We’d
stopped at one of the bridge’s main towers –
a cone of granite rising fifty feet above us.

72/1044

People said the towers looked like giant salt
and pepper shakers, but I’d always thought
they looked like Daleks from Doctor Who.
(So I’m a nerd. Sue me. And, yes, even homeless kids watch TV sometimes – in shelter
rec rooms, on public-library computers …
We have our ways.)
A hundred feet below us, the Charles River
glistened steel grey, its surface mottled with
patches of snow and ice like the skin of a
massive python.
Randolph leaned so far over the railing it
made me jittery.
‘The irony,’ he muttered. ‘Here, of all
places …’
‘So, anyway,’ I said, ‘about my father …’
Randolph gripped my shoulder. ‘Look
down there, Magnus. What do you see?’
Cautiously I glanced over the side. ‘Water.’
‘No, the carved ornamentation, just below
us.’

73/1044

I looked again. About halfway down the
side of the pier, a shelf of granite jutted over
the water like a theatre seating box with a
pointy tip. ‘It looks like a nose.’
‘No, it’s … Well, from this angle, it does
sort of look like a nose. But it’s the prow of a
Viking longship. See? The other pier has one,
too. The poet Longfellow – for whom the
bridge was named – he was fascinated by the
Norse. Wrote poems about their gods. Like
Eben Horsford, Longfellow believed the Vikings had explored Boston. Hence the designs
on the bridge.’
‘You should give tours,’ I said. ‘All the rabid Longfellow fans would pay big bucks.’
‘Don’t you see?’ Randolph still had his
hand on my shoulder, which wasn’t making
me any less anxious. ‘So many people over
the centuries have known. They’ve felt it instinctively, even if they had no proof. This
area wasn’t just visited by the Vikings. It was

74/1044

sacred to them! Right below us – somewhere
near these decorative longships – is the
wreck of an actual longship, holding a cargo
of incalculable value.’
‘I still see water. And I still want to hear
about Dad.’
‘Magnus, the Norse explorers came here
searching for the axis of the worlds, the very
trunk of the tree. They found it –’
A low boom echoed across the river. The
bridge shook. About a mile away, amid the
thicket of chimneys and steeples of Back Bay,
a column of oily black smoke mushroomed
skyward.
I steadied myself against the railing. ‘Um,
wasn’t that close to your house?’
Randolph’s expression hardened. His
stubbly beard glistened silver in the sunlight.
‘We’re out of time. Magnus, extend your
hand over the water. The sword is down
there. Call it. Focus on it as if it’s the most

75/1044

important thing in the world – the thing you
want the most.’
‘A sword? I – look, Randolph, I can tell
you’re having a hard day, but –’
‘DO IT.’
The sternness in his voice made me flinch.
Randolph had to be insane, talking about
gods and swords and ancient shipwrecks. Yet
the column of smoke over Back Bay was very
real. Sirens wailed in the distance. On the
bridge, drivers stuck their heads out of their
windows to gawk, holding up smartphones
and taking pictures.
And, as much as I wanted to deny it, Randolph’s words resonated with me. For the
first time, I felt like my body was humming
at the right frequency, like I’d finally been
tuned to match the crappy soundtrack of my
life.
I stretched my hand out over the river.
Nothing happened.

76/1044

Of course nothing happened, I chided myself. What were you expecting?
The bridge shook more violently. Further
down the sidewalk, a jogger stumbled. From
behind me came the crunch of one car rearending another. Horns blared.
Above the rooftops of Back Bay, a second
column of smoke billowed. Ash and orange
cinders sprayed upward as if the explosion
were volcanic, spewing from the ground.
‘That – that was a lot closer,’ I noted. ‘It’s
like something is zeroing in on us.’
I really hoped Randolph would say, Nah,
of course not. Don’t be silly!
He seemed to get older before my eyes. His
wrinkles darkened. His shoulders slumped.
He leaned heavily on his cane. ‘Please, not
again,’ he muttered to himself. ‘Not like last
time.’

77/1044

‘Last time?’ Then I remembered what he’d
said about losing his wife and daughters – a
storm out of nowhere, fires.
Randolph locked eyes with me. ‘Try again,
Magnus. Please.’
I thrust my hand towards the river. I imagined I was reaching for my mom, trying to
pull her from the past – trying to save her
from the wolves and the burning apartment.
I reached for answers that might explain why
I’d lost her, why my whole life since then had
been nothing but a downhill spiral of suck.
Directly below me, the surface of the water
began to steam. Ice melted. Snow evaporated, leaving a hole the shape of a hand – my
hand, twenty times larger.
I didn’t know what I was doing. I’d had the
same feeling when my mom first taught me
to ride a bike. Don’t think about what you’re
doing, Magnus. Don’t hesitate, or you’ll fall.
Just keep going.

78/1044

I swept my hand back and forth. A hundred feet below, the steaming hand mirrored
my movements, clearing the surface of the
Charles. Suddenly I stopped. A pinpoint of
warmth hit the centre of my palm as if I’d intercepted a beam of sunlight.
Something was down there … a heat
source buried deep in the frigid mud of the
river bottom. I closed my fingers and pulled.
A dome of water swelled and ruptured like
a dry-ice bubble. An object resembling a lead
pipe shot upward and landed in my hand.
It looked nothing like a sword. I held it by
one end, but there was no hilt. If it had ever
had a point or a sharp edge, it didn’t now.
The thing was about the right size for a
blade, but it was so pitted and corroded, so
encrusted with barnacles and glistening with
mud and slime, I couldn’t even be sure it was
metal. In short, it was the saddest, flimsiest,

79/1044

most disgusting piece of scrap I’d ever magically pulled from a river.
‘At last!’ Randolph lifted his eyes to the
heavens. I got the feeling that, if not for his
bum knee, he might’ve knelt on the ground
and offered a prayer to the non-existent
Norse gods.
‘Yeah.’ I hefted my new prize. ‘I feel safer
already.’
‘You can renew it!’ Randolph said. ‘Just
try!’
I turned the blade. I was surprised that it
hadn’t already disintegrated in my hand.
‘I dunno, Randolph. This thing looks way
past renewing. I’m not even sure it can be
recycled.’
If I sound unimpressed or ungrateful,
don’t get me wrong. The way I’d pulled the
sword out of the river was so cool it freaked
me out. I’d always wanted a superpower. I
just hadn’t expected mine to entail retrieving

80/1044

garbage from river bottoms. The communityservice volunteers were going to love me.
‘Concentrate, Magnus!’ Randolph said.
‘Quickly, before –’
Fifty feet away, the centre of the bridge
erupted in flames. The shock wave pushed
me against the rail. The right side of my face
felt sunburned. Pedestrians screamed. Cars
swerved and crashed into one another.
For some stupid reason, I ran towards the
explosion. It was like I couldn’t help myself.
Randolph shuffled after me, calling my
name, but his voice seemed far away,
unimportant.
Fire danced across the roofs of cars. Windows shattered from the heat, spraying the
street with glass gravel. Drivers scrambled
out of their vehicles and fled.
It looked like a meteor had hit the bridge.
A ten-foot-diameter circle of asphalt was
charred and steaming. In the centre of the

81/1044

impact zone stood a human-size figure: a
dark man in a dark suit.
When I say dark, I mean his skin was the
purest, most beautiful shade of black I’d ever
seen. Squid ink at midnight would not have
been so black. His clothes were the same: a
well-tailored jacket and slacks, a crisp shirt
and tie – all cut from the fabric of a neutron
star. His face was inhumanly handsome,
chiselled obsidian. His long hair was combed
back in an immaculate oil slick. His pupils
glowed like tiny rings of lava.
I thought, If Satan were real, he would
look like this guy.
Then I thought, No, Satan would be a
schlub next to this guy. This guy is like
Satan’s fashion consultant.
Those red eyes locked on to me.
‘Magnus Chase.’ His voice was deep and
resonant, his accent vaguely German or
Scandinavian. ‘You have brought me a gift.’

82/1044

An abandoned Toyota Corolla stood
between us. Satan’s fashion consultant
walked straight through it, melting a path
down the middle of the chassis like a blowtorch through wax.
The sizzling halves of the Corolla collapsed
behind him, the wheels melted to puddles.
‘I will make you a gift as well.’ The dark
man extended his hand. Smoke curled off his
sleeve and ebony fingers. ‘Give me the sword
and I will spare your life.’

SIX

Make Way for Ducklings,
or They Will Smack You
Upside the Head

I’d seen some weird stuff in my life.
I once watched a crowd of people wearing
nothing but Speedos and Santa hats jog
down Boylston in the middle of winter. I met
a guy who could play the harmonica with his
nose, a drum set with his feet, a guitar with
his hands and a xylophone with his butt all at
the same time. I knew a woman who’d adopted a grocery cart and named it Clarence.
Then there was the dude who claimed to be

85/1044

from Alpha Centauri and had philosophical
conversations with Canada geese.
So a well-dressed Satanic male model who
could melt cars … why not? My brain just
kind of expanded to accommodate the
weirdness.
The dark man waited, his hand outstretched. The air around him rippled with
heat.
About a hundred feet down the span of the
bridge, a Red Line commuter train ground to
a halt. The conductor gawked at the chaos in
front of her. Two joggers tried to pull a guy
from a half-crushed Prius. The lady with the
double stroller was unfastening her screaming kids, the stroller’s wheels having melted
into ovals. Standing next to her, instead of
helping, one idiot held up his smartphone
and tried to film the destruction. His hand
was shaking so badly I doubted he was getting a very good picture.

86/1044

Now at my shoulder, Randolph said, ‘The
sword, Magnus. Use it!’
I got the uncomfortable impression my big
burly uncle was hiding behind me.
The dark man chuckled. ‘Professor Chase
… I admire your persistence. I thought our
last encounter would’ve broken your spirit.
But here you are, ready to sacrifice another
family member!’
‘Be quiet, Surt!’ Randolph’s voice was
shrill. ‘Magnus has the sword! Go back to the
fires from whence you came.’
Surt didn’t seem intimidated, though personally I found the word whence very
intimidating.
Fire Dude studied me like I was as
barnacle-encrusted as the sword. ‘Give it
here, boy, or I will show you the power of
Muspell. I will incinerate this bridge and
everyone on it.’

87/1044

Surt raised his arms. Flames slithered
between his fingers. At his feet, the paved
ground bubbled. More windshields
shattered. The train tracks groaned. The Red
Line conductor yelled frantically into her
walkie-talkie. The pedestrian with the smartphone fainted. The mom collapsed over the
stroller, her kids still crying inside. Randolph
grunted and staggered backwards.
Surt’s heat didn’t make me pass out. It just
made me angry. I didn’t know who this fiery
jack-hole was, but I knew a bully when I met
one. First rule of the streets: never let a bully
take your stuff.
I pointed my once-might-have-been-asword at Surt. ‘Cool down, man. I have a corroded piece of metal and I’m not afraid to
use it.’
Surt sneered. ‘Just like your father, you are
no fighter.’

88/1044

I clenched my teeth. Okay, I thought, time
to ruin this guy’s outfit.
But, before I could take action, something
whizzed past my ear and smacked Surt in the
forehead.
Had it been a real arrow, Surt would’ve
been in trouble. Fortunately for him, it was a
plastic toy projectile with a pink heart for a
point – a Valentine’s Day novelty, I guessed.
It hit Surt between the eyes with a cheerful
squeak, fell to his feet and promptly melted.
Surt blinked. He looked as confused as I
was.
Behind me a familiar voice shouted, ‘Run,
kid!’
Charging up the bridge came my buddies
Blitz and Hearth. Well … I say charging.
That implies it was impressive. It really
wasn’t. For some reason, Blitz had donned a
broad-brimmed hat and sunglasses along
with his black trench coat, so he looked like a

89/1044

grungy, very short Italian priest. In his
gloved hands he wielded a fearsome wooden
dowel with a bright yellow traffic sign that
read: MAKE WAY FOR DUCKLINGS.
Hearth’s red-striped scarf trailed behind
him like limp wings. He nocked another arrow in his pink plastic Cupid’s bow and fired
at Surt.
Bless their demented little hearts. I understood where they’d got the ridiculous
weapons: the toy store on Charles Street. I
panhandled in front of that place sometimes,
and they had that stuff in their window display. Somehow, Blitz and Hearth must’ve
followed me here. In their rush, they’d done
a smash-and-grab of the nearest deadly objects. Being crazed homeless guys, they
hadn’t chosen very well.
Dumb and pointless? You bet. But it
warmed my heart that they wanted to look
out for me.

90/1044

‘We’ll cover you!’ Blitz charged by me.
‘Run!’
Surt hadn’t been expecting an attack by
lightly armed bums. He stood there while Blitz smacked him across the head with the
MAKE WAY FOR DUCKLINGS sign. Hearth’s next
squeaky arrow misfired and hit me in the
butt.
‘Hey!’ I complained.
Being deaf, Hearth couldn’t hear me. He
ran past me and into battle, thwacking Surt
in the chest with his plastic bow.
Uncle Randolph grabbed my arm. He was
wheezing badly. ‘Magnus, we have to go.
NOW!’
Maybe I should have run, but I stood there
frozen, watching my only two friends attack
the dark lord of fire with cheap plastic toys.
Finally Surt tired of the game. He backhanded Hearth and sent him flying across
the ground. He kicked Blitz in the chest so

91/1044

hard the little guy stumbled backwards and
landed on his butt right in front of me.
‘Enough.’ Surt extended his arm. From his
open palm, fire spiralled and elongated until
he was holding a curved sword made entirely
of white flame. ‘I am annoyed now. You will
all die.’
‘Gods’ galoshes!’ Blitz stammered. ‘That’s
not just any fire giant. That’s the Black One!’
As opposed to the Yellow One? I wanted to
ask, but the sight of the flaming sword kind
of stifled my will to joke.
Around Surt, flames began to swirl. The
firestorm spiralled outward, melting cars to
slag heaps, liquefying the asphalt, popping
rivets from the bridge like champagne corks.
I’d only thought it was warm before. Now
Surt was really turning up the temperature.
Hearth slumped against the railing about
thirty feet away. The unconscious pedestrians and trapped motorists wouldn’t last long

92/1044

either. Even if the flames didn’t touch them,
they’d die from asphyxiation or heat stroke.
But, for some reason, the heat still didn’t
bother me.
Randolph stumbled, hanging off my arm
with his full weight. ‘I – I … hum, umm …’
‘Blitz,’ I said, ‘get my uncle out of here.
Drag him if you have to.’
Blitz’s sunglasses were steaming. The brim
of his hat was beginning to smoulder. ‘Kid,
you can’t fight that guy. That’s Surt, the
Black One himself!’
‘You said that already.’
‘But Hearth and me – we’re supposed to
protect you!’
I wanted to snap, And you’re doing a
great job with the MAKE WAY FOR DUCKLINGS
sign! But what could I expect from a couple
of homeless dudes? They weren’t exactly
commandos. They were just my friends.
There was no way I’d let them die defending

93/1044

me. As for Uncle Randolph … I hardly knew
the guy. I didn’t much like him. But he was
family. He’d said he couldn’t stand to lose
another family member. Yeah, well, neither
could I. This time I wasn’t going to run away.
‘Go,’ I told Blitz. ‘I’ll get Hearth.’
Somehow Blitz managed to hold up my
uncle. Together they stumbled off.
Surt laughed. ‘The sword will be mine,
boy. You cannot change fate. I will reduce
your world to cinders!’
I turned to face him. ‘You’re starting to aggravate me. I have to kill you now.’
I walked into the wall of flames.

SEVEN

You Look Great Without
a Nose, Really

Wow, Magnus, you’re probably thinking.
That was … stupid!
Thanks. I have my moments.
Normally I don’t go stepping into walls of
flame. But I had a feeling it wouldn’t hurt
me. I know that sounds weird, but so far I
hadn’t passed out. The heat didn’t feel so
bad, even though the asphalt was turning to
sludge at my feet.
Extreme temperatures have never
bothered me. I don’t know why. Some people

96/1044

are double-jointed. Some people can wiggle
their ears. I can sleep outside in the winter
without freezing to death, and hold matches
under my hand without getting burned. I’d
won some bets that way in the homeless
shelters, but I’d never thought of my tolerance as something special … magical. I’d
definitely never tested its limits.
I walked through the curtain of fire and
smacked Surt in the head with my rusty
sword. Because, you know¸ I always try to
keep my promises.
The blade didn’t seem to hurt him, but the
swirling flames died. Surt stared at me for a
millisecond, completely shocked. Then he
punched me in the gut.
I’d been punched before, just not by a fiery
heavyweight whose ring name was the Black
One.
I folded like a deckchair. My vision blurred
and tripled. When I regained my focus, I was

97/1044

on my knees, staring at a puddle of regurgitated milk, turkey and crackers steaming on
the asphalt.
Surt could have taken my head off with his
fiery sword, but I guess he didn’t feel I was
worth it. He paced in front of me, making
tsk-tsk sounds.
‘Feeble,’ he said. ‘A soft little boy. Give me
the blade of your own free will, Vanir-spawn.
I promise you a quick death.’
Vanir-spawn?
I knew a lot of good insults, but I’d never
heard that one.
The corroded sword was still in my hand. I
felt my pulse against the metal as if the
sword itself had developed a heartbeat. Resonating up the blade, all the way to my ears,
was a faint hum like a car engine turning
over.
You can renew it, Randolph had told me.

98/1044

I could almost believe the old weapon was
stirring, waking up. Not fast enough, though.
Surt kicked me in the ribs and sent me
sprawling.
I lay flat on my back, staring at the smoke
in the winter sky. Surt must have kicked me
hard enough to trigger a near-death hallucination. A hundred feet up, I saw a girl in armour on a horse made of mist, circling like a
vulture over the battle. She held a spear
made of pure light. Her chain mail shone like
silvered glass. She wore a conical steel helmet over a green head wrap, sort of like a
medieval knight. Her face was beautiful but
stern. Our eyes met for a fraction of a
second.
If you’re real, I thought, help.
She dissolved into smoke.
‘The sword,’ Surt demanded, his obsidian
face looming over me. ‘It’s worth more to me

99/1044

freely surrendered, but, if I must, I will prise
it from your dead fingers.’
In the distance, sirens wailed. I wondered
why emergency crews hadn’t shown up
already. Then I remembered the other two
giant explosions in Boston. Had Surt caused
them, too? Or brought along some fiery
friends?
At the edge of the bridge, Hearth staggered
to his feet. A few unconscious pedestrians
had started to stir. I couldn’t see Randolph
or Blitz anywhere. Hopefully they were out of
danger by now.
If I could keep Burning Man occupied,
maybe the rest of the bystanders would have
time to clear out, too.
Somehow I managed to stand.
I looked at the sword and … yeah, I was
definitely hallucinating.
Instead of a corroded piece of junk, I held
an actual weapon. The leather-wrapped grip

100/1044

felt warm and comfortable in my hand. The
pommel, a simple polished-steel oval, helped
counterweight the thirty-inch blade, which
was double-edged and rounded at the tip,
more for hacking than for stabbing. Down
the centre of the blade, a wide groove was
emblazoned with Viking runes – the same
kind I’d seen in Randolph’s office. They
shimmered a lighter shade of silver, as if
they’d been inlaid while the blade was
forged.
The sword was definitely humming now,
almost like a human voice trying to find the
right pitch.
Surt stepped back. His lava-red eyes
flickered nervously. ‘You don’t know what
you have there, boy. You won’t live long
enough to find out.’
He swung his scimitar.
I’d had no experience with swords, unless
you count watching The Princess Bride

101/1044

twenty-six times as a kid. Surt would’ve cut
me in half – but my weapon had other ideas.
Ever held a spinning top on the tip of your
finger? You can feel it moving under its own
power, tilting in all directions. The sword
was like that. It swung itself, blocking Surt’s
fiery blade. Then it spun in an arc, dragging
my arm along with it, and hacked into Surt’s
right leg.
The Black One screamed. The wound in
his thigh smouldered, setting his trousers on
fire. His blood sizzled and glowed like the
flow from a volcano. His fiery blade
dissipated.
Before he could recover, my sword leaped
upward and slashed his face. With a howl,
Surt stumbled back, cupping his hands over
his nose.
To my left, someone screamed – the mother with the two kids.

102/1044

Hearth was trying to help her extract her
toddlers from the stroller, which was now
smoking and about to combust.
‘Hearth!’ I yelled, before remembering
that was no good.
With Surt still distracted, I limped over to
Hearth and pointed down the bridge. ‘Go!
Get the kids out of here!’
He could read lips just fine, but he didn’t
like my message. He shook his head adamantly, hoisting one of the toddlers into his
arms.
The mom was cradling the other kid.
‘Leave now,’ I told her. ‘My friend will help
you.’
The mom didn’t hesitate. Hearth gave me
one last look: This is not a good idea. Then
he followed her, the little kid bouncing up
and down in his arms crying, ‘Ah! Ah! Ah!’
Other innocent people were still stuck on
the bridge: drivers trapped in their cars,

103/1044

pedestrians wandering around in a daze,
their clothes steaming and their skin lobster
red. Emergency sirens were closer now, but I
didn’t see how the police or paramedics
could help if Surt was still storming around
being all fiery and stuff.
‘Boy!’ The Black One sounded like he was
gargling with syrup.
He took his hands from his face, and I saw
why. My self-guided sword had taken off his
nose. Molten blood streamed down his
cheeks, splattering on the ground in sizzling
droplets. His trousers had burned off, leaving him in a pair of flame-patterned red boxers. Between that and the newly sawed-off
snout, he looked like a diabolical version of
Porky Pig.
‘I have tolerated you long enough,’ he
gargled.

104/1044

‘I was just thinking the same thing about
you.’ I raised the sword. ‘You want this?
Come and get it.’
In retrospect, that was a pretty stupid
thing to say.
Above me, I caught a glimpse of the weird
grey apparition – a girl on a horse, circling
like a vulture, watching.
Instead of charging, Surt bent down and
scooped asphalt from the road with his bare
hands. He moulded it into a red-hot sphere
of steaming gunk and pitched it towards me
like a fastball.
Another game I’m not good at: baseball. I
swung the sword, hoping to knock away the
projectile. I missed. The asphalt cannonball
ploughed into my gut and embedded itself –
burning, searing, destroying.
I couldn’t breathe. The pain was so intense
I felt every cell in my body explode in a chain
reaction.

105/1044

Despite that, a strange sort of calm fell
over me: I was dying. I wasn’t coming back
from this. Part of me thought, All right.
Make it count.
My vision dimmed. The sword hummed
and tugged at my hand, but I could barely
feel my arms.
Surt studied me, a smile on his ruined
face.
He wants the sword, I told myself. He
can’t have it. If I’m going out, he’s going
with me.
Weakly, I raised my free hand. I flipped
him a gesture that he wouldn’t need to know
sign language to understand.
He roared and charged.
Just as he reached me, my sword leaped
up and ran him through. I used the last of
my strength to grapple him as his momentum carried us both over the railing.

106/1044

‘No!’ He fought to free himself, bursting
into flames, kicking and gouging, but I held
on as we plummeted towards the Charles
River, my sword still embedded in his stomach, my own organs burning away from the
molten tar in my gut. The sky flashed in and
out of view. I caught a glimpse of the smoky
apparition – the girl on the horse diving towards me at a full gallop, her hand
outstretched.
FLOOM! I hit the water.
Then I died. The end.

EIGHT

Mind the Gap, and Also
the Hairy Guy with the
Axe

Back in school, I loved ending stories that
way.
It’s the perfect conclusion, isn’t it? Billy
went to school. He had a good day. Then he
died. The end.
It doesn’t leave you hanging. It wraps
everything up nice and neat.
Except in my case it didn’t.
Maybe you’re thinking, Oh, Magnus, you
didn’t really die. Otherwise you couldn’t be

109/1044

narrating this story. You just came close.
Then you were miraculously rescued, blah,
blah, blah.
Nope. I actually died. One hundred per
cent: guts impaled, vital organs burned, head
smacked into a frozen river from forty feet
up, every bone in my body broken, lungs
filled with ice water.
The medical term for that is dead.
Gee, Magnus, what did it feel like?
It hurt. A lot. Thanks for asking.
I started to dream, which was weird – not
only because I was dead, but because I never
dream. People have tried to argue with me
about that. They say everybody dreams and I
just don’t remember mine. But, I’m telling
you, I always slept like the dead. Until I was
dead. Then I dreamed like a normal person.
I was hiking with my mom in the Blue
Hills. I was maybe ten years old. It was a
warm summer day, with a cool breeze

110/1044

through the pines. We stopped at
Houghton’s Pond to skip stones across the
water. I managed three skips. My mom managed four. She always won. Neither of us
cared. She would laugh and hug me and that
was enough for me.
It’s hard to describe her. To really understand Natalie Chase, you had to meet her.
She used to joke that her spirit animal was
Tinker Bell from Peter Pan. If you can imagine Tinker Bell at age thirty-something,
minus the wings, wearing flannel, denim and
Doc Martens, you’ve got a pretty good picture of my mom. She was a petite lady with
delicate features, short blonde pixie hair and
leaf-green eyes that sparkled with humour.
Whenever she read me stories, I used to gaze
at the spray of freckles across her nose and
try to count them.
She radiated joy. That’s the only way I can
put it. She loved life. Her enthusiasm was

111/1044

infectious. She was the kindest, most easygoing person I ever knew … until the weeks
leading up to her death.
In the dream, that was still years in the future. We stood together at the pond. She
took a deep breath, inhaling the scent of
warm pine needles.
‘This is where I met your father,’ she told
me. ‘On a summer day just like this.’
The comment surprised me. She rarely
talked about my dad. I’d never met him, never even seen pictures of him. That might
sound strange, but my mom didn’t make a
big deal out of their relationship, so neither
did I.
She was clear that my dad hadn’t abandoned us. He’d just moved on. She wasn’t
bitter. She had fond memories of their brief
time together. After it ended, she’d found out
she was pregnant with me, and she was

112/1044

elated. Ever since, it had been just the two of
us. We didn’t need anyone else.
‘You met him at the pond?’ I asked. ‘Was
he good at skipping stones?’
She laughed. ‘Oh, yeah. He destroyed me
at stone skipping. That first day … it was perfect. Well, except for one thing.’ She pulled
me close and kissed my forehead. ‘I didn’t
have you yet, pumpkin.’
Okay, yes. My mom called me pumpkin.
Go ahead and laugh. As I got older, it embarrassed me, but that was while she was still
alive. Now I’d give anything to hear her call
me pumpkin again.
‘What was my dad like?’ I asked. It felt
strange to say my dad. How can somebody
be yours if you’ve never met him? ‘What
happened to him?’
My mom spread her arms to the sunlight.
‘That’s why I bring you here, Magnus. Can’t
you feel it? He’s all around us.’

113/1044

I didn’t know what she meant. Usually she
didn’t talk in metaphors. My mom was about
as literal and down-to-earth as you could get.
She ruffled my hair. ‘Come on, I’ll race you
to the beach.’
My dream shifted. I found myself standing
in Uncle Randolph’s library. In front of me,
lounging sideways across the desk, was a
man I’d never seen before. He was walking
his fingers across the collection of old maps.
‘Death was an interesting choice, Magnus.’
The man grinned. His clothes looked fresh
from the store: blinding white sneakers,
crisp new jeans and a Red Sox home jersey.
His feathery hair was a mix of red, brown
and yellow, tousled in a fashionable I-justgot-out-of-bed-and-I-look-this-good sort of
way. His face was shockingly handsome. He
could’ve done ads for aftershave in men’s
magazines, but his scars ruined the perfection. Burn tissue splashed across the bridge

114/1044

of his nose and his cheekbones, like impact
lines on the moon’s surface. His lips were
marred by a row of welts all the way around
his mouth – maybe piercing holes that had
closed over. But why would anyone have that
many mouth piercings?
I wasn’t sure what to say to the scarred
hallucination, but since my mom’s words
were still lingering in my head, I asked, ‘Are
you my father?’
The hallucination raised his eyebrows. He
threw back his head and laughed.
‘Oh, I like you! We’ll have fun. No, Magnus
Chase, I’m not your father, but I’m definitely
on your side.’ He traced his finger under the
Red Sox logo on his jersey. ‘You’ll meet my
son soon enough. Until then, a little advice:
don’t trust appearances. Don’t trust your
comrades’ motives. Oh, and –’ he lunged forward and grabbed my wrist – ‘tell the AllFather I said hello.’

115/1044

I tried to break free. His grip was like steel.
The dream changed. Suddenly I was flying
through cold grey fog.
‘Stop struggling!’ said a female voice.
Holding my wrist was the girl I’d seen circling the bridge. She charged through the air
on her nebulous horse, pulling me along at
her side like I was a sack of laundry. Her
blazing spear was strapped across her back.
Her chain-mail armour glinted in the grey
light.
She tightened her grip. ‘Do you want to
fall into the Gap?’
I got a feeling she wasn’t talking about the
clothing store. Looking below me, I saw
nothing – just endless grey. I decided I did
not want to fall into it.
I tried to speak. I couldn’t. I shook my
head weakly.
‘Then stop struggling,’ she ordered.

116/1044

Beneath her helmet, a few wisps of dark
hair had escaped her green headscarf. Her
eyes were the colour of redwood bark.
‘Don’t make me regret this,’ she said.
My consciousness faded.
I awoke gasping, every muscle in my body
tingling with alarm.
I sat up and grabbed my gut, expecting to
find a burning hole where my intestines used
to be. No smouldering asphalt was embedded there. I felt no pain. The strange sword
was gone. My clothes looked perfectly fine –
not wet or burned or torn.
In fact, my clothes looked too fine. The
same stuff I’d been wearing for weeks – my
only pair of jeans, my layers of shirts, my
jacket – didn’t smell. They’d seemingly been
washed, dried and put back on me while I
was unconscious, which was an unsettling
idea. They even had a warm lemony scent

117/1044

that reminded me of the good old days when
my mom did my laundry. My shoes were like
new, as shiny as when I dug them out of the
dumpster behind Marathon Sports.
Even weirder: I was clean. My hands weren’t caked with grime. My skin felt freshly
scrubbed. I ran my fingers through my hair
and found no tangles, no twigs, no pieces of
litter.
Slowly I got to my feet. There wasn’t a
scratch on me. I bounced on my heels. I felt
like I could run a mile. I breathed in the
smell of chimney fires and an approaching
snowstorm. I almost laughed with relief.
Somehow I’d survived!
Except … that wasn’t possible.
Where was I?
Gradually my senses expanded. I was
standing in the entry courtyard of an opulent
town house, the kind you might see on
Beacon Hill – eight storeys of imposing

118/1044

white limestone and grey marble jutting into
the winter sky. The double front doors were
dark heavy wood bound with iron. In the
centre of each was a life-size wolf’s-head
door knocker.
Wolves … that alone was enough to make
me hate the place.
I turned to look for a street exit. There
wasn’t one, just a fifteen-foot-tall white limestone wall surrounding the courtyard. How
could you not have a front gate?
I couldn’t see much over the wall, but I
was obviously still in Boston. I recognized
some of the surrounding buildings. In the
distance rose the towers of Downtown Crossing. I was probably on Beacon Street, just
across from the Common. But how had I got
here?
In one corner of the courtyard stood a tall
birch tree with pure white bark. I thought
about climbing it to get over the wall, but the

119/1044

lowest branches were out of reach. Then I
realized the tree was in full leaf, which
shouldn’t have been possible in the winter.
Not only that: its leaves glittered gold as if
someone had painted them with twentyfour-carat gilt.
Next to the tree, a bronze plaque was affixed to the wall. I hadn’t really noticed it
earlier, since half the buildings in Boston had
historic markers, but now I looked closer.
The inscriptions were in two languages. One
was the Norse alphabet I’d seen earlier. The
other was English:
WELCOME TO THE GROVE OF GLASIR.
NO SOLICITING. NO LOITERING.
HOTEL DELIVERIES: PLEASE USE THE NIFLHEIM
ENTRANCE.

Okay … I’d exceeded my daily quota of
bizarre. I had to get out of here. I had to get
over that wall, find out what had happened

120/1044

to Blitz and Hearth – and maybe Uncle Randolph if I was feeling generous – then possibly hitchhike to Guatemala. I was done
with this town.
Then the double doors swung inward with
a groan. Blinding golden light spilled out.
A burly man appeared on the stoop. He
wore a doorman’s uniform: top hat, white
gloves and a dark green jacket with tails and
the interlocking letters HV embroidered on
the lapel, but there was no way this guy was
an actual doorman. His warty face was
smeared with ashes. His beard hadn’t been
trimmed in decades. His eyes were bloodshot
and murderous, and a double-bladed axe
hung at his side. His name tag read:
HUNDING, SAXONY, VALUED TEAM MEMBER SINCE
749 C.E.

‘S-s-sorry,’ I stammered. ‘I must … um,
wrong house.’

121/1044

The man scowled. He shuffled closer and
sniffed me. He smelled like turpentine and
burning meat. ‘Wrong house? I don’t think
so. You’re checking in.’
‘Uh … what?’
‘You’re dead, aren’t you?’ the man said.
‘Follow me. I’ll show you to registration.’

NINE

You Totally Want the
Minibar Key

Would it surprise you to learn that the place
was bigger on the inside?
The foyer alone could’ve been the world’s
largest hunting lodge – a space twice as big
as the mansion appeared on the outside. An
acre of hardwood floor was covered with
exotic animal skins: zebra, lion and a fortyfoot-long reptile that I wouldn’t want to have
met when it was alive. Against the right wall,
a fire crackled in a bedroom-size hearth. In
front of it, a few high-school-age guys in

124/1044

fluffy green bathrobes lounged on overstuffed leather couches, laughing and drinking from silver goblets. Over the mantel hung
the stuffed head of a wolf.
Oh, joy, I thought with a shudder. More
wolves.
Columns made from rough-hewn tree
trunks held up the ceiling, which was lined
with spears for rafters. Polished shields
gleamed on the walls. Light seemed to radiate from everywhere – a warm golden glow
that hurt my eyes like a summer afternoon
after a dark theatre.
In the middle of the foyer, a freestanding
display board announced:
TODAY’S ACTIVITIES
SINGLE COMBAT TO THE DEATH! – OSLO ROOM, 10
A.M.
GROUP COMBAT TO THE DEATH! – STOCKHOLM
ROOM, 11 A.M.

125/1044

BUFFET LUNCH TO THE DEATH! – DINING HALL, 12
P.M.
FULL ARMY COMBAT TO THE DEATH! – MAIN
COURTYARD, 1 P.M.
BIKRAM YOGA TO THE DEATH! – COPENHAGEN
ROOM,
BRING YOUR OWN MAT, 4 P.M.

The doorman Hunding said something,
but my head was ringing so badly I missed it.
‘Sorry,’ I said, ‘what?’
‘Luggage,’ he repeated. ‘Do you have any?’
‘Um …’ I reached for my shoulder strap.
My backpack had apparently not been resurrected with me. ‘No.’
Hunding grunted. ‘No one brings luggage
any more. Don’t they put anything on your
funeral pyre?’
‘My what?’
‘Never mind.’ He scowled towards the far
corner of the room, where an overturned

126/1044

boat’s keel served as the reception desk.
‘Guess there’s no putting it off. Come on.’
The man behind the keel apparently used
the same barber as Hunding. His beard was
so big it had its own zip code. His hair looked
like a buzzard that had exploded on a windshield. He was dressed in a forest-green pinstriped suit. His name tag read: HELGI,
MANAGER, EAST GOTHLAND, VALUED TEAM MEMBER
SINCE 749 C.E.

‘Welcome!’ Helgi glanced up from his
computer screen. ‘Checking in?’
‘Uh –’
‘You realize check-in time is three p.m.,’ he
said. ‘If you die earlier in the day, I can’t
guarantee your room will be ready.’
‘I can just go back to being alive,’ I offered.
‘No, no.’ He tapped on his keyboard. ‘Ah,
here we are.’ He grinned, revealing exactly
three teeth. ‘We’ve upgraded you to a suite.’

127/1044

Next to me, Hunding muttered under his
breath, ‘Everyone is upgraded to a suite. All
we have are suites.’
‘Hunding …’ warned the manager.
‘Sorry, sir.’
‘You don’t want me to use the stick.’
Hunding winced. ‘No, sir.’
I looked back and forth between them,
checking their name tags.
‘You guys started working here the same
year,’ I noted. ‘749 … what is C.E.?’
‘Common Era,’ said the manager. ‘What
you might call A.D.’
‘Then why don’t you just say A.D.?’
‘Because Anno Domini, in the Year of Our
Lord, is fine for Christians, but Thor gets a
little upset. He still holds a grudge that Jesus
never showed up for that duel he challenged
him to.’
‘Say what now?’

128/1044

‘It’s not important,’ Helgi said. ‘How many
keys would you like? Is one sufficient?’
‘I still don’t get where I am. If you guys
have been here since 749, that’s over a thousand years.’
‘Don’t remind me,’ Hunding grumbled.
‘But that’s impossible. And … and you said
I’m dead? I don’t feel dead. I feel fine.’
‘Sir,’ Helgi said, ‘all this will be explained
tonight at dinner. That’s when new guests
are formally welcomed.’
‘Valhalla.’ The word surfaced from the
depths of my brain – a half-remembered
story my mom had read me when I was little.
‘The HV on your lapel. The V stands for
Valhalla?’
Helgi’s eyes made it clear I was straining
his patience. ‘Yes, sir. The Hotel Valhalla.
Congratulations. You’ve been chosen to join
the hosts of Odin. I look forward to hearing
about your brave exploits at dinner.’

129/1044

My legs buckled. I leaned on the desk for
support. I’d been trying to convince myself
this was all a mistake – some elaborate
theme hotel where I’d been mistaken for a
guest. Now I wasn’t so sure.
‘Dead,’ I mumbled. ‘You mean I’m actually
… I’m actually –’
‘Here is your room key.’ Helgi handed me
a stone engraved with a single Viking rune,
like the stones in Uncle Randolph’s library.
‘Would you like the minibar key?’
‘Uh –’
‘He wants the minibar key,’ Hunding
answered for me. ‘Kid, you want the minibar
key. It’s going to be a long stay.’
My mouth tasted like copper. ‘How long?’
‘Forever,’ Helgi said, ‘or at least until Ragnarok. Hunding will now show you to your
room. Enjoy your afterlife. Next!’

TEN

My Room Does Not Suck

I wasn’t paying the closest attention as
Hunding guided me through the hotel. I felt
as if I’d been spun around fifty times then released into the middle of a circus and told to
have fun.
Each hall we walked through seemed bigger than the one before. Most of the hotel
guests looked like they were in high school,
though some looked slightly older. Guys and
girls sat together in small groups, lounging in
front of fireplaces, chatting in many different
languages, eating snacks or playing board
games like chess and Scrabble and

132/1044

something that involved real daggers and a
blowtorch. Peeking into side lounges, I spotted pool tables, pinball machines, an oldfashioned video arcade and something that
looked like an iron maiden from a torture
chamber.
Staff members in dark green shirts moved
among the guests, bringing platters of food
and pitchers of drink. As far as I could tell,
all the servers were buff female warriors with
shields on their backs and swords or axes on
their belts, which is not something you see a
lot in the service industry.
One heavily armed waitress passed me
with a steaming plate of spring rolls. My
stomach rumbled.
‘How can I be hungry if I’m dead?’ I asked
Hunding. ‘None of these people look dead.’
Hunding shrugged. ‘Well, there’s dead and
then there’s dead. Think of Valhalla more

133/1044

like … an upgrade. You’re one of the einherjar now.’
He pronounced the word like in-HAIRyar.
‘Einherjar,’ I repeated. ‘Just rolls right off
the tongue.’
‘Yeah. Singular: einherji.’ He said it like inHAIR-yee. ‘We’re the chosen of Odin, soldiers in his eternal army. The word einherjar
is usually translated as lone warriors, but
that doesn’t really capture the meaning. It’s
more like … the once warriors – the warriors
who fought bravely in the last life and will
fight bravely again on the Day of Doom.
Duck.’
‘The Day of Doom Duck?’
‘No, duck!’
Hunding pushed me down as a spear flew
past. It impaled a guy sitting on the nearest
sofa, killing him instantly. Drinks, dice and
Monopoly money flew everywhere. The

134/1044

people he’d been playing with rose to their
feet, looking mildly annoyed, and glared in
the direction the spear had come from.
‘I saw that, John Red Hand!’ Hunding
yelled. ‘The lounge is a No Impaling area!’
From the billiard room, somebody laughed
and called back in … Swedish? He didn’t
sound very remorseful.
‘Anyway.’ Hunding resumed walking as if
nothing had happened. ‘The elevators are
right over here.’
‘Wait,’ I said. ‘That guy was just murdered
with a spear. Aren’t you going to do
anything?’
‘Oh, the wolves will clean up.’
My pulse went into double time. ‘Wolves?’
Sure enough, while the other Monopoly
players were sorting their pieces, a pair of
grey wolves bounded into the lounge,
grabbed the dead man by his legs and
dragged him away, the spear still sticking out

135/1044

of his chest. The trail of blood evaporated instantly. The perforated sofa mended itself.
I cowered behind the nearest potted plant.
I don’t care how that sounds. My fear simply
took control. These wolves didn’t have glowing blue eyes like the animals that had attacked my apartment, but still I wished I’d
ended up in an afterlife where the mascot
was a gerbil.
‘Aren’t there any rules against killing?’ I
asked in a small voice.
Hunding raised a bushy eyebrow. ‘That
was just a bit of fun, boy. The victim will be
fine by dinner.’ He pulled me out of my hiding place. ‘Come on.’
Before I could ask more about the ‘bit of
fun’, we reached an elevator. Its cage door
was made out of spears. Overlapping gold
shields lined the walls. The control panel had
so many buttons, it stretched from floor to

136/1044

ceiling. The highest number was 540. Hunding pressed 19.
‘How can this place have five hundred and
forty floors?’ I said. ‘It would be the tallest
building in the world.’
‘If it only existed in one world, yes. But it
connects with all the Nine Worlds. You just
came through the Midgard entrance. Most
mortals do.’
‘Midgard …’ I vaguely remembered
something about the Vikings believing in
nine different worlds. Randolph had used
the term worlds, too. But it had been a long
time since my mom read me those Norse
bedtime stories. ‘You mean, like, the world of
humans.’
‘Aye.’ Hunding took a breath and recited,
‘Five hundred and forty floors has Valhalla;
five hundred and forty doors leading out into the Nine Worlds.’ He grinned. ‘You never

137/1044

know when or where we’ll have to march off
to war.’
‘How often has that happened?’
‘Well, never. But still … it could happen at
any time. I, for one, can’t wait! Finally, Helgi
will have to stop punishing me.’
‘The manager? What’s he punishing you
for?’
Hunding’s expression soured. ‘Long story.
He and I –’
The elevator’s spear-cage door rolled open.
‘Forget it.’ Hunding clapped me on the
back. ‘You’ll like floor nineteen. Good
hallmates!’
I’d always thought of hotel corridors as
dark, depressing and claustrophobic. Floor
nineteen? Not so much. The vaulted ceiling
was twenty feet tall, lined with – you guessed
it – more spears for rafters. Valhalla had apparently got a good deal at the Spear Wholesale Warehouse. Torches burned in iron

138/1044

sconces, but they didn’t seem to make any
smoke. They just cast warm orange light
across the wall displays of swords, shields
and tapestries. The hall was so wide you
could’ve played a regulation soccer game, no
problem. The blood-red carpet had treebranch designs that moved as if swaying in
the wind.
Set about fifty feet apart, each guest-room
door was rough-hewn oak bound in iron. I
didn’t see any doorknobs or locks. In the
centre of each door, a plate-size iron circle
was inscribed with a name surrounded by a
ring of Viking runes.
The first read: HALFBORN GUNDERSON. Behind that door I heard shouting and metal
clanging like a sword fight was in progress.
The next read: MALLORY KEEN. Behind that
door, silence.

139/1044

Then: THOMAS JEFFERSON JR. The popping of
gunfire came from inside, though it sounded
more like a video game than the actual thing.
(Yes, I’ve heard both.)
The fourth door was simply marked X. In
front, a room-service cart sat in the hallway
with the severed head of a pig on a silver
platter. The pig’s ears and nose looked
slightly nibbled.
Now, I’m not a food critic. Being homeless,
I could never afford to be. But I draw the line
at pig heads.
We’d almost reached the T at the end of
the hall when a large black bird shot around
the corner and zipped past me, almost clipping my ear. I watched the bird disappear
down the hall – a raven, with a notepad and
a pen in its talons.
‘What was that?’ I asked.
‘A raven,’ Hunding said, which I found
very helpful.

140/1044

Finally we stopped at a door inscribed
MAGNUS CHASE.
Seeing my name written in iron, inscribed
with runes, I started to tremble. My last hope
that this might be a mistake, birthday prank
or cosmic mix-up finally evaporated. The
hotel was expecting me. They’d spelled my
name right and everything.
For the record, Magnus means great. My
mom named me that because our family was
descended from Swedish kings or something
a billion years ago. Also, she said I was the
greatest thing that had ever happened to her.
I know. One, two, three: Awwwwww. It was
an annoying name to have. People tended to
spell it Mangus, rhymes with Angus. I always
corrected them: No, it’s Magnus, rhymes
with swag-ness. At which point they would
stare at me blankly.
Anyway, there was my name on the door.
Once I went through, I would be checked in.

141/1044

According to the manager, I’d have a new
home until doomsday.
‘Go ahead.’ Hunding pointed at the runestone key in my hand. The symbol looked
sort of like an infinity sign or a sideways
hourglass:

‘It’s dagaz,’ Hunding said. ‘Nothing to be
afraid of. It symbolizes new beginnings,
transformations. It also opens your door.
Only you have access.’
I swallowed. ‘What if, for instance, the
staff want to get in?’
‘Oh, we use the staff key.’ Hunding patted
the axe on his belt. I couldn’t tell if he was
kidding.
I held up the runestone. I didn’t want to
try it, but I also didn’t want to stay in the
hallway until I got impaled by a random

142/1044

spear or injured by a raven hit-and-run. Instinctively, I touched the stone to the matching dagaz mark on the door. The ring of
runes glowed green. The door swung open.
I stepped inside, and my jaw hit the floor.
The suite was nicer than any place I’d ever
lived, nicer than any place I’d ever visited,
including Uncle Randolph’s mansion.
In a trance, I moved to the middle of the
suite, where a central atrium was open to the
sky. My shoes sank into the thick green
grass. Four large oak trees ringed the garden
like pillars. The lower branches spread into
the room across the ceiling, interweaving
with the rafters. The taller branches grew up
through the opening of the atrium, making a
lacy canopy. Sunlight warmed my face. A
pleasant breeze wafted through the room,
bringing the smell of jasmine.
‘How?’ I stared at Hunding. ‘Hundreds of
floors are above us, but that’s open sky. And

143/1044

it’s the middle of winter. How can it feel
sunny and warm?’
Hunding shrugged. ‘I don’t know – magic.
But this is your afterlife, boy. You’ve earned
some perks, eh?’
Had I? I didn’t feel particularly perkworthy.
I turned in a slow circle. The suite was
shaped like a cross, with four sections radiating from the central atrium. Each wing was
as large as my old apartment. One was the
entry hall where we’d come in. The next was
a bedroom with a king-size bed. Despite its
size, the room was spare and simple: beige
covers and fluffy-looking pillows on the bed,
beige walls with no artwork or mirrors or
other decoration. Heavy brown curtains
could be drawn to close off the space.
I remembered when I was a kid, how my
mom used to make my room as no-frills as
possible. I’d always found it hard to sleep

144/1044

indoors unless I had total darkness and
nothing to distract me. Looking at this bedroom, I felt like somebody had reached into
my mind and pulled out exactly what I
needed to be comfortable.
The wing to the left was a dressing area/
bathroom tiled in black and beige, my favourite colours. The perks included a sauna,
a hot tub, a walk-in wardrobe, a walk-in
shower and a walk-in toilet. (Just kidding on
that last one, but it was a fancy throne, suitable for the honoured dead.)
The suite’s fourth wing was a full kitchen
and living room. At one end of the living
room, a big leather couch faced a plasmascreen TV with about six different game systems stacked in the media cabinet. On the
other side, two recliners sat in front of a
crackling fireplace and a wall of books.
Yes, I like to read. I’m weird that way.
Even after dropping out of school, I spent a

145/1044

lot of time in the Boston Public Library,
learning random stuff just to pass the time in
a warm, safe place. For two years I had
missed my old book collection; I never seriously thought I would have one again.
I walked over to check out the titles on the
shelves. Then I noticed the picture framed in
silver on the fireplace mantel.
Something like a bubble of helium made
its way up my oesophagus. ‘No way …’
I picked up the photo. It showed me, at age
eight, and my mom at the summit of Mount
Washington in New Hampshire. That had
been one of the best trips of my life. We’d
asked a park ranger to take the photo. In the
shot, I was grinning (which I don’t do much
any more), showing off my missing two front
teeth. My mom knelt behind me with her
arms wrapped around my chest, her green
eyes crinkling at the corners, her freckles

146/1044

dark from the sun, her blonde hair swept
sideways by the wind.
‘This is impossible,’ I murmured. ‘There
was only one copy of this picture. It burned
in the fire …’ I turned to Hunding, who was
wiping his eyes. ‘You okay?’
He cleared his throat. ‘Fine! Of course I’m
fine. The hotel likes to provide you with
keepsakes, reminders of your old life. Photographs …’ Under his beard, his mouth might
have been quivering. ‘Back when I died, they
didn’t have photographs. It’s just … you’re
lucky.’
No one had called me lucky in a very long
time. The idea shook me out of my daze. I’d
been without my mom for two years. I’d been
dead, or upgraded, for only a few hours. This
bellhop from Saxony had been here since
749 C.E. I wondered how he had died and
what family he’d left behind. Twelve hundred
years later, he was still getting teary-eyed

147/1044

about them, which seemed like a cruel way to
spend an afterlife.
Hunding straightened and wiped his nose.
‘Enough of that! If you have any questions,
call the front desk. I look forward to hearing
about your brave exploits tonight at dinner.’
‘My … brave exploits?’
‘Now, don’t be modest. You wouldn’t have
been chosen unless you did something
heroic.’
‘But –’
‘Been a pleasure serving you, sir, and welcome to the Hotel Valhalla.’
He held out his palm. It took me a second
to realize he wanted a tip.
‘Oh, um …’ I dug into my jacket pockets,
not expecting to find anything. Miraculously,
the chocolate bar I’d swiped from Uncle Randolph’s house was still there, undamaged
from its trip through the Great Beyond. I
gave it to Hunding. ‘Sorry, that’s all I have.’

148/1044

His eyes turned the size of drink coasters.
‘Gods of Asgard! Thank you, kid!’ He sniffed
the chocolate and held it up like a holy
chalice. ‘Wow! Okay, you need anything, you
let me know. Your Valkyrie will come get you
right before dinner. Wow!’
‘My Valkyrie? Wait. I don’t have a
Valkyrie.’
Hunding laughed, his eyes still fixed on
the chocolate bar. ‘Yeah, if I had your
Valkyrie, I’d say the same thing. She’s caused
her share of trouble.’
‘What do mean?’
‘See you tonight, kid!’ Hunding headed for
the door. ‘I got things to eat – I mean do. Try
not to kill yourself before dinner!’

ELEVEN

Pleased to Meet You. I
Will Now Crush Your
Windpipe

I collapsed on the grass.
Gazing up through the tree branches at the
blue sky, I had trouble breathing. I hadn’t
had an asthma attack in years, but I remembered all the nights my mom had held
me while I wheezed, feeling like an invisible
belt was tightening around my chest. Maybe
you’re wondering why my mom would take
me camping and climbing mountains if I had
asthma, but being outside always helped.

151/1044

Lying in the middle of the atrium, I
breathed in the fresh air and hoped my lungs
would settle down.
Unfortunately, I was pretty sure this
wasn’t an asthma attack. This was a complete nervous breakdown. What shook me
wasn’t just the fact that I was dead, stuck in a
bizarre Viking afterlife where people ordered
pig heads from the room-service menu and
impaled each other in the lobby.
The way my life had gone so far, I could
accept that. Of course I’d end up in Valhalla
on my sixteenth birthday. Just my luck.
What really hit me: for the first time since
my mom died, I was in a comfortable place,
alone and safe (as far as I could tell at the
moment). Shelters didn’t count. Soup kitchens and rooftops and sleeping bags under
bridges didn’t count. I’d always slept with
one eye open. I could never relax. Now, I was
free to think.

152/1044

And thinking wasn’t a good thing.
I’d never had the luxury of grieving properly for my mom. I’d never had time to sit
and feel sorry for myself. In a way, that had
been as helpful to me as the survival skills
my mom had taught me – how to navigate,
how to camp, how to make a fire.
All those trips to the parks, the mountains,
the lakes. As long as her old beat-up Subaru
was working, we’d spend every weekend out
of town, exploring the wilderness.
What are we running from? I asked her
one Friday, a few months before she died. I
was annoyed. I wanted to crash at home for
once. I didn’t understand her frantic rush to
pack and leave.
She’d smiled, but she seemed more preoccupied than usual. We have to make the
most of our time, Magnus.
Had my mom been deliberately preparing
me to survive on my own? Almost as if she’d

153/1044

known what would happen to her … but that
wasn’t possible. Then again, having a Norse
god for a dad wasn’t possible either.
My breathing still rattled, but I got up and
paced around my new room. In the photo on
the mantel, eight-year-old Magnus grinned
at me with his tangled hair and his missing
teeth. That kid was so clueless, so unappreciative of what he had.
I scanned the bookshelves: my favourite
fantasy and horror authors from when I was
younger – Stephen King, Darren Shan, Neal
Shusterman, Michael Grant, Joe Hill; my
favourite graphic-novel series – Scott Pilgrim, Sandman, Watchmen, Saga; plus a lot
of books I’d been meaning to read at the library. (Pro homeless tip: public libraries are
safe havens. They have bathrooms. They
hardly ever kick out kids who are reading as
long as you don’t smell too bad or cause a
scene.)

154/1044

I pulled down the illustrated children’s
book of Norse myths my mom read to me
when I was little. Inside were simplistic pictures of happy, smiling Viking gods, rainbows, flowers and pretty girls with blonde
hair. And sentences like The gods dwelt in a
wonderful and beautiful realm! There was
nothing about the Black One, Surt, who
burned baby carriages and threw molten asphalt, nothing about wolves that murdered
people’s mothers and made apartments explode. That made me angry.
On the coffee table was a leather-bound
notebook titled GUEST SERVICES. I flipped
through it. The room-service menu went on
for ten pages. The TV channel list was almost
as long, and the hotel map was so convoluted, divided into so many subsections, I
couldn’t make sense of it. There were no
clearly marked emergency doors labelled:
EXIT HERE TO RETURN TO YOUR OLD LIFE!

155/1044

I threw the guest-services book into the
fireplace.
As it burned, a new copy appeared on the
coffee table. Stupid magical hotel wouldn’t
even allow me to properly vandalize things.
In a rage, I flipped the sofa. I didn’t expect
it to go far, but it cartwheeled across the
room and smashed into the far wall.
I stared at the trail of dislodged cushions,
the upside-down sofa, the cracked plaster
and leather skid marks on the wall. How had
I done that?
The sofa didn’t magically right itself. It
stayed where I’d thrown it. The anger
drained out of me. I’d probably just made extra work for some poor staff member like
Hunding. That didn’t seem fair.
I paced some more, thinking about the
dark fiery guy on the bridge and why he’d
wanted the sword. I hoped Surt had died
with me – more permanently than I had –

156/1044

but I wasn’t optimistic. As long as Blitz and
Hearth had got away safely. (Oh, yeah. Randolph, too, I guess.)
And the sword itself … where was it? Back
on the river bottom? Valhalla could resurrect
me with a chocolate bar in my pocket, but
not a sword in my hand. That was messed
up.
In the old stories, Valhalla was for heroes
who died in battle. I remembered that much.
I definitely didn’t feel like a hero. I’d got my
butt kicked and my guts cannonballed. By
stabbing Surt and toppling off the bridge, I’d
simply failed in the most productive way
possible. A brave death? Not so much.
I froze.
An idea struck me with the force of a
sledgehammer.
My mom … If anyone had died bravely, she
had. To protect me from –
Just then someone knocked on my door.

157/1044

It swung open and a girl stepped inside …
the same girl who had circled over the battle
on the bridge then pulled me through the
grey void.
She had ditched her helmet, chain mail
and glowing spear. Her green headscarf was
now around her neck, letting her long brown
hair spill freely over her shoulders. Her
white dress was embroidered with Viking
runes around the collar and cuffs. From her
golden belt hung a set of old-fashioned keys
and a single-bladed axe. She looked like the
maid of honour at someone’s Mortal Kombat wedding.
She glanced at the overturned sofa. ‘Did
the furniture offend you?’
‘You’re real,’ I noted.
She patted her own arms. ‘Yes, it appears I
am.’
‘My mother,’ I said.
‘No,’ she said, ‘I’m not your mother.’

158/1044

‘I mean, is she here in Valhalla?’
The girl’s mouth formed a silent Oh. She
gazed over my shoulder as if considering her
answer. ‘I’m sorry. Natalie Chase is not
among the Chosen.’
‘But she was the brave one. She sacrificed
herself for me.’
‘I believe you.’ The girl examined her key
ring. ‘But I would know if she were here. We
Valkyries are not allowed to choose everyone
who dies bravely. There are … many factors,
many different afterlives.’
‘Then where is she? I want to be there. I’m
no hero!’
She surged towards me, pushing me
against the wall as easily as I’d flipped the
sofa. She pressed her forearm against my
throat.
‘Don’t say that,’ the girl hissed. ‘DO – NOT
– SAY – THAT! Especially not tonight at
dinner.’

159/1044

Her breath smelled like spearmint. Her
eyes were somehow dark and bright at the
same time. They reminded me of a fossil my
mom used to have – a cross section of a
nautilus-like sea animal called an ammonite.
It seemed to glow from within, as if it had
absorbed millions of years of memories while
lying under the earth. The girl’s eyes had that
same sort of lustre.
‘You don’t understand,’ I croaked. ‘I have
to –’
She pushed harder against my windpipe.
‘What do you think I don’t understand?
Grieving for your mother? Being judged unfairly? Being somewhere you don’t want to
be, forced to deal with people you’d rather
not deal with?’
I didn’t know how to respond to that, especially since I couldn’t breathe.
She stepped away. As I choked and
gagged, she paced the foyer, glaring at

160/1044

nothing in particular. Her axe and keys
swung on her belt.
I rubbed my bruised neck.
Stupid, Magnus, I told myself. New place:
learn the rules.
I couldn’t start whining and making demands. I had to set aside the question of my
mother. If she were anywhere, I’d figure that
out later. Right now, being in this hotel was
no different than walking into an unfamiliar
youth shelter, alley encampment or churchbasement soup kitchen. Every place had
rules. I had to learn the power structure, the
pecking order, the no-nos that would get me
stabbed or rolled. I had to survive … even if I
was already dead.
‘Sorry,’ I said. My throat felt like I’d swallowed a live rodent with lots of claws. ‘But
why do you care if I’m a hero or not?’
She smacked her forehead. ‘Wow, okay.
Maybe because I brought you here? Maybe

161/1044

because my career is on the line? One more
slip-up and –’ She caught herself. ‘Never
mind. When you’re introduced, go along
with what I say. Keep your mouth shut, nod
your head and try to look brave. Don’t make
me regret bringing you here.’
‘All right. But, for the record, I didn’t ask
for your help.’
‘Odin’s Eye! You were dying! Your other
options were Helheim or Ginnungagap or …’
She shuddered. ‘Let’s just say there are
worse places to spend your afterlife than Valhalla. I saw what you did on the bridge.
Whether you recognize it or not, you acted
bravely. You sacrificed yourself to save a lot
of people.’
Her words sounded like a compliment.
Her tone sounded like she was calling me an
idiot.

162/1044

She marched over and poked me in the
chest. ‘You have potential, Magnus Chase.
Don’t prove me wrong or –’
From the wall speakers, a horn blast sounded so loudly it rattled the picture on the
mantel.
‘What’s that?’ I asked. ‘An air raid?’
‘Dinner.’ The girl straightened. She took a
deep breath and extended her hand. ‘Let’s
start again. Hi, I’m Samirah al-Abbas.’
I blinked. ‘Don’t take this the wrong way,
but that doesn’t sound like a very Viking-ish
name.’
She smiled tightly. ‘You can call me Sam.
Everyone does. I’ll be your Valkyrie this
evening. Pleased to meet you properly.’
She shook my hand, her grip so tight my
finger bones popped. ‘I will now escort you
to dinner.’ She forced a smile. ‘If you embarrass me, I’ll be the first to kill you.’

TWELVE

At Least I’m Not on
Goat-Chasing Duty

In the hallway, my neighbours were starting
to emerge. Thomas Jefferson Jr looked about
my age. He had short curly hair, a lanky
frame and a rifle slung over one shoulder.
His blue wool coat had brass buttons and
chevrons on the sleeve – a U.S. Army Civil
War uniform, I guessed. He nodded and
smiled. ‘How you doing?’
‘Um, dead, apparently,’ I said.
He laughed. ‘Yeah. You’ll get used to it.
Call me T.J.’

165/1044

‘Magnus,’ I said.
‘Come on.’ Sam pulled me along.
We passed a girl who must’ve been Mallory Keen. She had frizzy red hair, green eyes
and a serrated knife, which she was shaking
in the face of a six-foot-seven guy outside the
door marked X.
‘Again with the pig’s head?’ Mallory Keen
spoke in a faint Irish brogue. ‘X, do you think
I want to see a severed pig’s head every time
I step out of my front door?’
‘I could not eat any more,’ X rumbled. ‘The
pig head does not fit in my refrigerator.’
Personally, I would not have antagonized
the guy. He was built like a bomb-containment chamber. If you happened to have a
live grenade, I was pretty sure you could
safely dispose of it simply by asking X to
swallow it. His skin was the colour of a
shark’s belly, rippling with muscles and
stippled with warts. There were so many

166/1044

welts on his face it was hard to tell which one
was his nose.
We walked past, X and Mallory too busy
arguing to pay us any attention.
When we were out of earshot, I asked Sam,
‘What’s the deal with the big grey dude?’
Sam put her finger to her lips. ‘X is a halftroll. He’s a little sensitive about that.’
‘A half-troll. That’s an actual thing?’
‘Of course,’ she said. ‘And he deserves to
be here as much as you.’
‘Hey, no doubt. Just asking.’
The defensiveness in her voice made me
wonder what the story was.
As we passed the door for HALFBORN
GUNDERSON, an axe blade split the wood from
the inside. Muffled laughter came from the
room.
Sam ushered me into the elevator. She
pushed away several other einherjar who
were trying to get in. ‘Next car, guys.’

167/1044

The spear-cage door slid shut. Sam inserted one of her keys into an override slot on
the panel. She pressed a red rune and the elevator descended. ‘I’ll take you into the dining hall before the main doors open. That
way you can get the lay of the land.’
‘Uh … sure. Thanks.’
Nordic easy-listening music started playing from the ceiling.
Congratulations, Magnus! I thought. Welcome to warrior paradise, where you can
listen to Frank Sinatra in Norwegian
FOREVER!
I tried to think of something to say, preferably something that would not make Sam
crush my windpipe.
‘So … everybody on floor nineteen looks
about my age,’ I noted. ‘Or – our age. Does
Valhalla only take teenagers?’
Samirah shook her head. ‘The einherjar
are grouped by the age they were when they

168/1044

died. You’re in the youngest tier, which goes
up to about age nineteen. Most of the time,
you won’t even see the other two tiers –
adults and seniors. It’s better that way. The
adults … well, they don’t take teens seriously,
even if the teens have been here hundreds of
years longer.’
‘Typical,’ I said.
‘As for the senior warriors, they don’t always mix well. Imagine a really violent retirement home.’
‘Sounds like some shelters I’ve been in.’
‘Shelters?’
‘Forget it. So, you’re a Valkyrie. You chose
all the people in the hotel?’
‘Yes,’ she said. ‘I personally chose everyone
in this hotel.’
‘Ha, ha. You know what I meant. Your …
sisterhood or whatever.’
‘That’s right. Valkyries are responsible for
choosing the einherjar. Each warrior here

169/1044

died a valiant death. Each had a belief in
honour, or some connection to the Norse
gods that made him or her eligible for
Valhalla.’
I thought about what Uncle Randolph had
told me, how the sword had been a birthright
from my father. ‘A connection … like being
the child of a god?’
I was afraid Sam might laugh at me, but
she nodded gravely. ‘Many einherjar are
demigods. Many are regular mortals. You’re
chosen for Valhalla because of your courage
and honour, not your heritage. At least,
that’s how it’s supposed to be …’
I couldn’t decide if her tone was wistful or
resentful.
‘And you?’ I asked. ‘How did you become a
Valkyrie? Did you die a noble death?’
She laughed. ‘Not yet. I’m still among the
living.’
‘How does that work exactly?’

170/1044

‘Well, I live a double life. Tonight, I’ll escort you to dinner. Then I have to rush home
and finish my calculus homework.’
‘You’re not joking, are you?’
‘I never joke about calculus homework.’
The elevator doors opened. We stepped into a room the size of a concert arena.
My mouth dropped. ‘Holy –’
‘Welcome,’ Samirah said, ‘to the Feast Hall
of the Slain.’
Tiers of long tables like stadium seating
curved downward from the nosebleed section. In the centre of the room, instead of a
basketball court, a tree rose taller than the
Statue of Liberty. Its lowest branches were
maybe a hundred feet up. Its canopy spread
over the entire hall, scraping against the
domed ceiling and sprouting through a
massive opening at the top. Above, stars
glittered in the night sky.

171/1044

My first question probably wasn’t the most
important. ‘Why is there a goat in the tree?’
In fact, a lot of animals skittered among
the branches. I couldn’t tell what most of
them were, but wobbling along the lowest
branch was a very fat shaggy goat. Its
swollen udders rained milk like leaky
showerheads. Below, on the dining-hall
floor, a team of four stocky warriors carried a
big golden bucket on poles set across their
shoulders. They shuffled back and forth, trying to stay under the goat so they could catch
the streams of milk. Judging by how soaked
the warriors were, they missed a lot.
‘The goat is Heidrun,’ Sam told me. ‘Her
milk is brewed to make the mead of Valhalla.
It’s good stuff. You’ll see.’
‘And the guys chasing her around?’
‘Yeah, that’s a thankless job. Behave yourself, or you might get assigned to vat duty.’

172/1044

‘Uh … couldn’t they just, I don’t know,
bring the goat down here?’
‘She’s a free-range goat. Her mead tastes
better that way.’
‘Of course it does,’ I said. ‘And … all the
other animals? I see squirrels and possums
and –’
‘Sugar gliders and sloths,’ Sam offered.
‘Those are cute.’
‘Okay. But you guys eat dinner here? That
can’t be hygienic with all the animal
droppings.’
‘The animals in the Tree of Laeradr are
well behaved.’
‘The Tree of … Lay-rah-dur. You named
your tree.’
‘Most important things have names.’ She
frowned at me. ‘Who are you again?’
‘Very funny.’
‘Some of the animals are immortal and
have particular jobs. I can’t spot him right

173/1044

now, but somewhere up there is a stag
named Eikthrymir. We call him Ike for short.
You see that waterfall?’
It was hard to miss. From somewhere high
in the tree, water ran down grooves in the
bark and formed one powerful torrent that
cascaded off a branch in a roaring white curtain. It crashed into a pond the size of an
Olympic pool between two of the tree’s roots.
‘The stag’s horns spray water non-stop,’
Sam said. ‘It flows down the branches into
that lake. From there, it goes underground
and feeds every river in every world.’
‘So … all water is stag-horn run-off? I’m
pretty sure that’s not what they taught me in
earth science.’
‘It’s not all from Ike’s horns. There’s also
snowmelt, rainwater, pollutants and trace
amounts of fluoride and jotun spit.’
‘Jotun?’
‘You know, giants.’

174/1044

She didn’t appear to be kidding, though it
was hard to be sure. Her face was full of
tense humour – her eyes darting and alert,
her lips pressed together like she was either
suppressing a laugh or expecting an attack. I
could imagine her doing stand-up comedy,
though maybe not with the axe at her side.
Her features also seemed strangely familiar
– the line of her nose, the curve of her jaw,
the subtle streaks of red and copper in her
dark hair.
‘Have we met before?’ I asked. ‘I mean …
before you chose my soul for Valhalla?’
‘I doubt it,’ she said.
‘But you’re mortal? You live in Boston?’
‘Dorchester. I’m a sophomore at King
Academy. I live with my grandparents and
spend most of my time finding excuses to
cover for my Valkyrie activities. Tonight, Jid
and Bibi think I’m tutoring a group of

175/1044

elementary students in maths. Any other
questions?’
Her eyes sent the opposite message:
Enough with the personal stuff.
I wondered why she lived with her grandparents. Then I remembered what she’d said
earlier, about understanding what it was like
to grieve for a mother.
‘No more questions,’ I decided. ‘My head
would explode.’
‘That would be messy,’ Sam said. ‘Let’s get
your seat before –’
Around the perimeter of the room, a hundred doors burst open. The armies of Valhalla swarmed in.
‘Dinner is served,’ Sam said.

THIRTEEN

Phil the Potato Meets His
Doom

We were swept up in a tidal wave of hungry
warriors. Einherjar poured in from every direction, pushing, joking and laughing as they
headed for their seats.
‘Hold on,’ Sam told me.
She grabbed my wrist and we flew into the
air, Peter-Pan-style.
I yelped. ‘A little warning?’
‘I said hold on.’
We skimmed above the heads of the warriors. Nobody paid us much attention except

178/1044

for one guy I accidentally kicked in the face.
Other Valkyries were also zipping around –
some escorting warriors, some carrying platters of food and pitchers of drink.
We headed towards what was obviously
the head table – where the home team
would’ve sat if this were a Celtics game. A
dozen grim-looking dudes were taking their
seats in front of golden plates and jewel-encrusted goblets. In the place of honour stood
an empty wooden throne with a high back,
where two ravens perched, grooming their
feathers.
Sam landed us at the table to the left.
Twelve other people were just getting seated
– two girls and four guys in regular street
clothes; and six Valkyries dressed more or
less like Sam.
‘Other newcomers?’ I asked.
Sam nodded, her eyebrows furrowed.
‘Seven in one night is a lot.’

179/1044

‘Is that good or bad?’
‘More heroes dying means more bad
things are stirring in the world. Which
means …’ She pursed her lips. ‘Never mind.
Let’s get seated.’
Before we could, a tall Valkyrie stepped in
our path. ‘Samirah al-Abbas, what have you
brought us tonight – another half-troll? Perhaps a spy from your father?’
The girl looked about eighteen. She was
big enough to play power forward in the
NBA, with snow-blonde hair in braids down
either shoulder. Over her green dress she
wore a bandolier of ball-peen hammers,
which struck me as an odd choice of weapon.
Maybe Valhalla had a lot of loose nails.
Around her neck hung a golden amulet
shaped like a hammer. Her eyes were as pale
blue and cold as a winter sky.
‘Gunilla –’ Sam’s voice tightened – ‘this is
Magnus Chase.’

180/1044

I held out my hand. ‘Gorilla? Pleased to
meet you.’
The girl’s nostrils flared. ‘It is Gunilla, captain of the Valkyries. And you, newcomer –’
The foghorn I’d heard earlier echoed
through the hall. This time I could see the
source. Near the base of the tree, two guys
held a black-and-white animal horn the size
of a canoe while a third guy blew into it.
Thousands of warriors took their seats.
Gorilla gave me one last stink-eye, then spun
on her heel and marched off to the head
table.
‘Be careful,’ Sam warned me. ‘Gunilla is
powerful.’
‘Also kind of a butt.’
The corner of Sam’s mouth twitched.
‘That, too.’
She looked shaken, her knuckles white on
the haft of her axe. I wondered what Gunilla
had meant by a spy from your father, but,

181/1044

since my windpipe was still sore from the
last time I made Sam angry, I decided not to
ask.
I sat at the end of the table next to Sam, so
I didn’t get to talk to the other newbies.
Meanwhile, hundreds of Valkyries flew
around the room, distributing food and
drink. Whenever a Valkyrie’s pitcher was
empty, she would swoop over the golden vat
now bubbling over a large fire, fill her pitcher
with yummy goat’s-milk mead and continue
serving. The main course came from a roasting pit at the other end of the room. Rotating
on a hundred-foot-long spit was the carcass
of an animal. I wasn’t sure what it had been
when it was alive, but it was easily the size of
a blue whale.
A Valkyrie flew past, depositing a platter of
food and a goblet in front of me. I couldn’t
tell what the slices of meat were, but they
smelled great, drizzled in gravy with potatoes

182/1044

on the side and thick slices of bread with
butter. It had been a while since I’d had a hot
meal, but I still hesitated.
‘What kind of animal am I eating?’
Sam wiped her mouth with the back of her
hand. ‘It’s named Saehrimnir.’
‘Okay, first of all, who names their dinner?
I don’t want to know my dinner’s name. This
potato – is this potato named Steve?’
She rolled her eyes. ‘No, stupid. That’s
Phil. The bread is Steve.’
I stared at her.
‘Kidding,’ she said. ‘Saehrimnir is the magical beast of Valhalla. Every day they kill it
and cook it for dinner. Every morning it’s resurrected alive and well.’
‘That must suck for the animal. But is it
like a cow or a pig or –’
‘It’s whatever you want it to be. My portion
is beef. Different sections of the animal are

183/1044

chicken or pork. I don’t do pork, but some of
the guys here love it.’
‘What if I’m a vegetarian? What if I want
falafel?’
Sam became very still. ‘Was that some sort
of joke?’
‘Why would it be a joke? I like falafel.’
Her shoulders relaxed. ‘Well, if you want
falafel, just ask for the left flank. That part is
tofu and bean curd. They can spice it to taste
like just about anything.’
‘You have a magic animal whose left flank
is made of tofu.’
‘This is Valhalla, paradise for warriors in
the service of Odin. Your food will taste perfect, whatever you choose.’
My stomach was getting impatient, so I
dug in. The barbecue had just the right mix
of spicy and sweet. The bread was like a
warm cloud with a buttery crust. Even Phil
the potato tasted great.

184/1044

Not being a huge fan of free-range goat’s
milk, I was reluctant to try the mead, but the
stuff in my goblet looked more like sparkling
cider.
I took a sip. Sweet, but not too sweet. Cold
and smooth, with undercurrents I couldn’t
quite identify. Was that blackberry? Or
honey? Or vanilla? I drained my glass.
Suddenly my senses were on fire. It wasn’t
like alcohol (and, yes, I’ve tried alcohol,
thrown up, tried alcohol again, thrown up).
The mead didn’t make me giddy, dopey or
nauseous. It was more like iced espresso
without the bitter taste. It woke me up,
filling me with a warm sense of confidence,
but with no edginess or racing heartbeat.
‘This stuff is good,’ I admitted.
A Valkyrie swooped in, refilled my cup and
flew away.

185/1044

I glanced at Sam, who was brushing breadcrumbs off her scarf. ‘Do you ever do serving
duty?’
‘Yeah, sure. We take turns. It’s an honour
to serve the einherjar.’ She didn’t even sound
sarcastic.
‘How many Valkyries are there?’
‘Several thousand?’
‘How many einherjar?’
Sam puffed her cheeks. ‘Tens of thousands? Like I said, this is just the first dinner. There are two other shifts for the older
warriors. Valhalla has five hundred and forty
doors. Each one is supposed to accommodate eight hundred warriors exiting for battle
at once. That would mean four hundred and
thirty-two thousand einherjar.’
‘That’s a lot of tofu.’
She shrugged. ‘Personally, I think the
number is exaggerated, but only Odin knows

186/1044

for sure. We’ll need a big army when Ragnarok rolls around.’
‘Ragnarok,’ I said.
‘Doomsday,’ Sam said. ‘When the Nine
Worlds are destroyed in a great conflagration
and the armies of gods and giants meet in
battle for the last time.’
‘Oh. That Ragnarok.’
I scanned the sea of teenaged fighters. I remembered my first day of public high school
in Allston, a few months before my mom
died and my life turned to dumpster sludge.
The school had had around two thousand
kids. Between classes, the halls were sheer
chaos. The cafeteria was like a piranha tank.
But it was nothing compared to Valhalla.
I pointed towards the head table. ‘What
about the fancy dudes? Most of them look
older.’
‘I wouldn’t call them fancy dudes,’ Sam
said. ‘Those are the thanes, the lords of

187/1044

Valhalla. Each one was personally invited by
Odin to sit at his table.’
‘So the empty throne –’
‘Is for Odin. Yes. He … well, it’s been a
while since he’s shown up for dinner, but his
ravens watch everything and report back to
him.’
Those ravens made me nervous with their
beady black eyes. I got the feeling they were
taking a particular interest in me.
Sam pointed to the right of the throne.
‘There’s Erik Bloodax. And that’s Erik the
Red.’
‘A lot of Eriks.’
‘There’s Leif Erikson.’
‘Whoa … but he’s not wearing a metal bra.’
‘I’m going to ignore that comment. Over
there is Snorri. Then our charming friend
Gunilla. Then Lord Nelson and Davy
Crockett.’
‘Davy … wait, seriously?’

188/1044

‘At the end is Helgi the hotel manager. You
probably met him.’
Helgi seemed to be having a good time,
laughing with Davy Crockett and chugging
mead. Behind his chair, the bellhop Hunding
stood looking miserable, carefully peeling
grapes and handing them to Helgi one at a
time.
‘What’s the deal with the manager and
Hunding?’
Sam made a sour face. ‘Ancestral feud
when they were alive. When they died, both
made it to Valhalla, but Odin honoured Helgi
more. He put Helgi in charge of the hotel.
Helgi’s first order was that his enemy Hunding would be his servant and do his menial
tasks for all time.’
‘That doesn’t seem like much of a paradise
for Hunding.’
Sam hesitated. In a quieter voice, she said,
‘Even in Valhalla, there’s a pecking order.

189/1044

You don’t want to be at the bottom. Remember, when the ceremony begins –’
At the high table, the thanes began
banging their cups on the table in unison. All
around the hall, the einherjar joined in until
the Hall of the Slain thundered with a metal
heartbeat.
Helgi stood and raised his goblet. The
noise died down.
‘Warriors!’ The manager’s voice filled the
hall. He looked so regal it was hard to believe
he was the same guy who a few hours ago
had offered me a suite upgrade and a minibar key. ‘Seven new fallen have joined us
today! That would be reason enough to celebrate, but we also have a special treat for
you. Thanks to Valkyrie Captain Gunilla,
today, for the first time, we will not just hear
about our newcomers’ worthy deeds, we will
be able to see them!’

190/1044

Next to me, Sam made a choking sound.
‘No,’ she muttered. ‘No, no, no …’
‘Let the presentation of the dead commence!’ Helgi bellowed.
Ten thousand warriors turned and looked
expectantly in my direction.

FOURTEEN

Four Million Channels
and There’s Still Nothing
On Except Valkyrie
Vision

Hooray for going last.
I was relieved when the presentations started with einherjar at the other end of the
table … until I saw what the other newbies
had done to get into Valhalla.
Helgi called, ‘Lars Ahlstrom!’
A heavyset blond guy rose with his
Valkyrie. Lars was so nervous he knocked

193/1044

over his goblet, splashing magic mead all
over his crotch. A wave of laughter rippled
through the hall.
Helgi smiled. ‘As many of you know, Captain Gunilla has been phasing in new equipment over the past few months. She’s been
fitting her Valkyries’ armour with cameras to
keep everyone accountable – and hopefully
to keep us entertained!’
The warriors cheered and banged their
mugs, drowning out the sound of Sam cursing next to me.
Helgi raised his goblet. ‘I present to you,
Valkyrie Vision!’
Around the tree trunk, a ring of giant holographic screens flickered to life, floating in
mid-air. The video was choppy, apparently
taken from a camera on the shoulder of a
Valkyrie. We were high in the air, circling
over the scene of a sinking ferry in a grey sea.
Half the lifeboats dangled sideways from

194/1044

their cables. Passengers jumped overboard,
some without life jackets. The Valkyrie
swooped in closer. The video’s focus
sharpened.
Lars Ahlstrom scrambled along the tilting
deck, a fire extinguisher in his hands. The
door to the inside lounge was blocked by a
large metal container. Lars struggled to
move it, but it was too heavy. Inside the
lounge, a dozen people were trapped,
banging desperately on the windows.
Lars shouted something to them in …
Swedish? Norwegian? The meaning was
clear: GET BACK!
As soon they did, Lars smashed the extinguisher against the window. On the third try,
it shattered. Despite the cold, Lars stripped
off his coat and laid it across the broken
glass.
He stayed at the window until the last passengers were safely out. They ran for the

195/1044

lifeboats. Lars picked up the fire extinguisher
again and started to follow, but the ship
lurched violently. His head slammed into the
wall and he slid down, unconscious.
His body began to glow. The Valkyrie’s
arm appeared in the frame, reaching out. A
shimmering golden apparition rose from
Lars’s body – his soul, I guessed. Golden
Lars took the Valkyrie’s hand, and the video
screens went dark.
All around the feast hall, warriors cheered.
At the head table, the thanes debated
among themselves. I was close enough to
hear some of it. One guy – Lord Nelson? –
questioned whether a fire extinguisher could
count as a weapon.
I leaned towards Sam. ‘Why does that
matter?’
She tore her bread into smaller and smaller pieces. ‘To get into Valhalla, a warrior

196/1044

must die in battle with a weapon in his or her
hand. That’s the only way.’
‘So,’ I whispered, ‘anyone could get into
Valhalla if they just grabbed a sword and
died?’
She snorted. ‘Of course not. We can’t have
kids taking up weapons and dying on purpose. There’s nothing heroic about suicide.
The sacrifice, the bravery has to be unplanned – a genuine heroic response to a
crisis. It has to come from the heart, without
any thought of reward.’
‘So … what if the thanes decide that a newbie shouldn’t have been picked? Does he go
back to being alive?’ I tried not to sound too
hopeful.
Sam wouldn’t meet my eyes. ‘Once you’re
an einherji, there’s no going back. You might
get the worst work assignments. You might
have a hard time earning respect. But you
stay in Valhalla. If the thanes rule the death

197/1044

unworthy … well, the Valkyrie takes the punishment for that.’
‘Oh.’ Suddenly I understood why all the
Valkyries at our table looked a little tense.
The thanes took a vote among themselves.
They agreed unanimously that the fire extinguisher could count as a weapon and Lars’s
death could be seen as in combat.
‘What greater enemy is there than the
sea?’ said Helgi. ‘We find Lars Ahlstrom
worthy of Valhalla!’
More applause. Lars almost fainted. His
Valkyrie held him up while smiling and waving at the crowd.
When the noise died down, Helgi continued. ‘Lars Ahlstrom, do you know your
parentage?’
‘I –’ The newcomer’s voice cracked. ‘I never knew my father.’

198/1044

Helgi nodded. ‘That is not uncommon. We
will seek wisdom from the runes, unless the
All-Father wishes to intercede.’
Everyone turned towards the unoccupied
throne. The ravens ruffled their feathers and
squawked. The throne remained empty.
Helgi didn’t look surprised, but his
shoulders slumped with disappointment. He
motioned towards the fire pit. From a cluster
of servers and cooks, a lady in a green
hooded robe shuffled forward. Her face was
hidden in the shadows of her cowl, but,
judging from her stooped posture and her
gnarled hands, she must have been ancient.
I murmured to Sam, ‘Who’s the Wicked
Witch?’
‘A vala. A seer. She can cast spells, read
the future and … other stuff.’
The vala approached our table. She
stopped in front of Lars Ahlstrom and pulled
a leather pouch from the folds of her robe.

199/1044

She plucked out a handful of runestones like
the ones in Uncle Randolph’s study.
‘And the runes?’ I whispered to Sam.
‘What are they for?’
‘They’re the old Viking alphabet,’ she said,
‘but each letter also symbolizes something
powerful – a god, a type of magic, a force of
nature. They’re like the genetic code of the
universe. The vala can read the stones to see
your fate. The greatest sorcerers, like Odin,
don’t even need to use the stones. They can
manipulate reality simply by speaking the
name of a rune.’
I made a mental note to avoid Odin. I
didn’t need my reality manipulated any
further.
In front of our table, the vala muttered
something under her breath. She cast the
stones at her feet. They landed on the floor –
some face up, some face down. One rune in
particular seemed to catch everyone’s

200/1044

attention. The holographic screens projected
its image to everyone in the hall.

The mark meant nothing to me, but hundreds of warriors shouted with approval.
‘Thor!’ they cried. Then they started to
chant, ‘THOR, THOR, THOR!’
Sam grunted. ‘As if we need another child
of Thor.’
‘Why? What’s wrong with them?’
‘Nothing. They’re great. Gunilla over there
… she’s a daughter of Thor.’
‘Oh.’
The Valkyrie captain was smiling, which
was even scarier than her scowl.
As the chanting subsided, the vala raised
her withered arms. ‘Lars, son of Thor, rejoice! The runes say you shall fight well at
Ragnarok. And tomorrow, in your first

201/1044

combat, you shall prove your valour and be
decapitated!’
The audience cheered and laughed. Lars
suddenly looked very pale. That just made
the warriors laugh harder, as if decapitation
were a hazing ritual no worse than a wedgie.
The vala gathered her runes and retreated
while Lars’s Valkyrie helped him back into
his seat.
The ceremony continued. Next up was a
newcomer named Dede. She’d saved a bunch
of kids at her village school when a warlord’s
soldiers had tried to kidnap them. She’d flirted with one of the soldiers, tricked him into
letting her hold his assault rifle, then turned
it on the warlord’s men. She was killed, but
her selfless act gave the other kids time to get
away. The video was pretty violent. The Vikings loved it. Dede got a standing ovation.
The vala read the runes. She confirmed
that Dede’s parents were regular mortals, but

202/1044

nobody seemed to mind that. According to
Dede’s fortune, she would fight valiantly at
Ragnarok. Over the next week she would lose
her arms several times in combat. Within a
hundred years she would rise to the thanes’
table.
‘Oooooo!’ the crowd murmured
appreciatively.
The other four newcomers were equally
impressive. They’d all saved people. They’d
sacrificed their lives bravely. Two were mortals. One was a son of Odin, which caused a
minor commotion.
Sam leaned towards me. ‘Like I said, Odin
has not been seen in quite a while. We welcome any sign that he still moves among
mortals.’
The last newcomer was a daughter of
Heimdall. I wasn’t sure who that was, but the
Vikings seemed impressed.

203/1044

My head was swimming from too much information. My senses were on fire from too
much mead. I didn’t even realize we’d
reached the end of the table until Helgi
called my name.
‘Magnus Chase!’ he bellowed. ‘Rise and
impress us with your courage!’

FIFTEEN

My Blooper Video Goes
Viral

My courage impressed no one.
I squirmed in my seat as the video played.
The einherjar watched the screens in
shocked silence. Then the mumbling and
grumbling began, punctuated by bursts of incredulous laughter.
Valkyrie Vision showed only portions of
what had happened. I saw myself on the
bridge, facing Surt as he summoned a fiery
tornado. The camera zoomed in on me
threatening him with my corroded piece of

206/1044

metal. Then Hearth and Blitz appeared. Blitz
hit the Black One with his MAKE WAY FOR
DUCKLINGS sign. Hearth’s squeaky toy arrow
hit me in the butt. Surt punched me. Surt
kicked me in the ribs. I puked and squirmed
in agony.
The video fast-forwarded to me backing up
against the bridge railing. Surt threw his
fiery asphalt cannonball. I swung my sword
and missed. In the feast hall, thousands of
warriors grunted ‘Ooooo!’ as the chunk of asphalt hit me in the gut. Surt charged, and we
both went over the side, grappling as we fell.
Just before we hit the water, the video
froze and zoomed in. The sword was now
sticking out of Surt’s gut, but my hands weren’t on the grip. They were wrapped around
Surt’s big neck.
An uncomfortable murmur spread
through the room.

207/1044

‘No,’ I said. ‘No, that’s not how – Someone
edited that. It’s like a blooper reel.’
Sam’s face had turned to stone. At the
thanes’ table, Captain Gunilla smirked. Her
cameras, I realized, her editing.
For some reason, Gunilla wanted to disgrace Sam by making me look like an idiot …
which, granted, wasn’t a difficult task.
Helgi set down his goblet. ‘Samirah al-Abbas … explain.’
Sam touched the edge of her scarf. I had a
feeling she wanted to pull it over her head
and hope the room disappeared. I couldn’t
blame her.
‘Magnus Chase died bravely,’ she said. ‘He
stood alone against Surt.’
More uneasy murmuring.
One of the thanes stood. ‘You say that was
Surt. A fire jotun, certainly, but if you are
suggesting it was the Lord of Muspellheim
himself –’

208/1044

‘I know what I saw, Erik Bloodax. This one
–’ Sam gestured at me like I was a prize specimen – ‘saved many lives on that bridge.
The video does not show the whole story.
Magnus Chase acted like a hero. He deserves
to be among the fallen.’
Another thane rose. ‘He didn’t actually die
with the sword in his hand.’
‘Lord Ottar –’ Sam’s voice sounded
strained – ‘the thanes have looked past such
a technicality before. Whether or not Magnus gripped the sword at the moment of
death, he died bravely in combat. That is the
spirit of Odin’s law.’
Lord Ottar sniffed. ‘Thank you, Samirah
al-Abbas, daughter of Loki, for teaching us
the spirit of Odin’s law.’
The tension level in the hall went up about
thirty notches. Sam’s hand drifted towards
her axe. I doubted anyone but me could see
how her fingers twitched.

209/1044

Loki … I knew that name – Norse mythology’s big villain, born of giants. He was the
arch-enemy of the gods. If Sam was his
daughter, why was she here? How had she
become a Valkyrie?
I happened to meet Gunilla’s eyes. The
captain was obviously loving this drama. She
could barely suppress a smile. If she was
Thor’s kid, that explained why she hated
Sam. In the old stories, Thor and Loki were
always trying to melt each other’s faces.
The thanes debated among themselves.
Finally, Helgi the manager spoke.
‘Samirah, we’re not seeing any heroism in
this boy’s death. We see a dwarf and an elf
with toy weapons –’
‘A dwarf and an elf?’ I asked, but Helgi ignored me.
‘– we see a fire jotun who fell off a bridge
and took the boy with him. That’s an unusual

210/1044

situation, a son of Muspell crossing into
Midgard, but it has happened before.’
‘Shoot,’ muttered a thane with bushy sideburns. ‘Y’all should’ve seen the big ol’ fire jotun Santa Anna had with him at the Alamo. I
tell you –’
‘Yes, thank you, Lord Crockett.’ Helgi
cleared his throat. ‘As I was saying, we see
very little evidence that Magnus Chase was a
worthy choice for Valhalla.’
‘My lords –’ Sam spoke slowly and carefully, like she was addressing children – ‘the
video is not accurate.’
Helgi laughed. ‘Are you suggesting we
shouldn’t trust our own eyes?’
‘I’m suggesting that you hear the story
from my point of view. It has always been
our tradition to tell of the hero’s deeds.’
Gunilla stood. ‘Pardon me, my lords, but
Samirah is correct. Perhaps we should let the
daughter of Loki speak.’

211/1044

The crowd booed and hissed. Some called,
‘No! No!’
Helgi gestured for silence. ‘Gunilla, you do
your sisterhood credit by defending a fellow
Valkyrie, but Loki has always been a master
of smooth, honeyed words. Personally, I
would rather trust what I see than have it
spun for me in some clever explanation.’
Warriors applauded.
Gunilla shrugged like, Oh, well, I tried!
and sank back into her chair.
‘Magnus Chase!’ Helgi called. ‘Do you
know your parentage?’
I counted to five. My first inclination was
to yell, No, but your dad was apparently a
jackass!
‘I don’t know my father,’ I admitted. ‘But,
look, about that video –’
‘Perhaps you have potential we do not recognize,’ Helgi said. ‘Perhaps you are a son of
Odin or Thor or some other noble war god,

212/1044

and your presence brings us honour. We will
seek wisdom from the runes, unless the AllFather would intercede?’
He glanced at the throne, which remained
empty. The ravens studied me with dark
hungry eyes.
‘Very well,’ Helgi said. ‘Bring forth the vala
and –’
Between the roots of the tree, where the
waterfall hit the dark lake, a massive bubble
erupted. BLOOP! On the surface of the water
stood three women shrouded in white.
Except for the crackle of cooking fire and
the sound of the waterfall, the hall was silent.
Thousands of warriors watched, frozen in
amazement, as the three white women glided
across the floor, heading towards me.
‘Sam?’ I whispered. ‘Sam, what’s going
on?’
Her hand fell from her axe.

213/1044

‘The Norns,’ she said. ‘The Norns themselves have come to read your fate.’

SIXTEEN

Norns. Why Did It Have
to Be Norns?

I really wished someone had warned me I
was going to die. Like, Hey, you’re diving off
a bridge tomorrow and becoming an undead Viking, so go read up on Valhalla.
I felt seriously unprepared.
I remembered hearing about Norns, the
ladies who controlled mortal destinies, but I
didn’t know their names or their motivation
or the proper etiquette for meeting them.
Was I supposed to bow? Offer them gifts?
Run away screaming?

216/1044

Next to me, Sam muttered, ‘This is bad.
The Norns only show up in extreme cases.’
I didn’t want to be an extreme case. I
wanted to be an easy case: Hey, good job.
You’re a hero. Have a cookie.
Or even better: Oops. This was all a mistake. You can go back to your regularly
scheduled life.
Not that my regularly scheduled life was so
great, but it beat getting judged unworthy by
twelve bearded guys named Erik.
As the Norns got closer, I realized how big
they were – at least nine feet tall each. Under
their hoods, their faces were beautiful but
unnerving – blank white, even their eyes.
Trailing behind them came a sheet of fog like
a bridal train. They stopped twenty feet in
front of my table and turned up their palms.
Their skin was like sculpted snow.
Magnus Chase. I couldn’t tell which Norn
had spoken. The soft disembodied voice

217/1044

resonated through the hall, seeping into my
head, turning my skull into an icebox.
Harbinger of the Wolf.
The crowd stirred uneasily. I’d seen the
word harbinger somewhere before, maybe in
a fantasy novel, but I couldn’t remember
what it meant. I didn’t like the sound of it. I
liked the sound of wolf even less.
I’d just about decided that running away
screaming was my smartest option. Then, in
the hands of the middle Norn, fog collected,
solidifying into half a dozen runestones. She
threw them into the air. They floated above
her, each rune expanding into a luminous
white symbol as big as a poster board.
I couldn’t read runes, but I recognized the
one in the centre. It was the same symbol I’d
picked from the pouch in Uncle Randolph’s
office:

218/1044

Fehu, announced the cold voice. The rune
of Frey.
Thousands of warriors shifted in their
seats, clanking restlessly in their armour.
Frey … Who was Frey? My mind felt
coated with frost. My thoughts were
sluggish.
The Norns spoke together, three ghostly
voices chanting in unison, shaking leaves
from the giant tree:
Wrongly chosen, wrongly slain,
A hero Valhalla cannot contain.
Nine days hence the sun must go east,
Ere Sword of Summer unbinds the beast.

The glowing runes dissolved. The three
Norns bowed to me. They melted into the fog
and disappeared.

219/1044

I glanced at Sam. ‘How often does that
happen?’
She looked like she’d been smacked
between the eyes with one of Gunilla’s hammers. ‘No. Choosing you couldn’t have been a
mistake. I was told … I was promised –’
‘Someone told you to pick me up?’
Instead of answering, she murmured under her breath – as if running calculations
for a rocket that had gone off course.
At the thanes’ table, the lords conferred.
All around the hall, thousands of einherjar
studied me. My stomach folded itself into
various origami shapes.
Finally, Helgi faced me. ‘Magnus Chase,
son of Frey, your destiny is troubling. The
lords of Valhalla must think on this further.
For the time being, you shall be welcomed as
a comrade. You are one of the einherjar now.
That cannot be reversed, even if it was a
mistake.’

220/1044

He scowled at Sam. ‘Samirah al-Abbas, the
Norns themselves have pronounced your
judgement in error. Do you have any
defence?’
Sam’s eyes widened as if she’d just realized
something. ‘The son of Frey …’ She looked
around the room desperately. ‘Einherjar,
don’t you see? This is the son of Frey! Surt
himself was on that bridge! That means the
sword …’ She turned to the thanes’ table.
‘Gunilla, you must see what that means. We
have to find that sword! A quest,
immediately –’
Helgi banged his fist on the table.
‘Enough! Samirah, you stand in judgement
for a grave mistake. It is not your place to tell
us what to do. It is definitely not your place
to order a quest!’
‘I did not make a mistake,’ Sam said. ‘I did
as I was ordered! I –’

221/1044

‘Ordered?’ Helgi narrowed his eyes.
‘Ordered by whom?’
Sam’s mouth shut. She seemed to deflate.
Helgi nodded grimly. ‘I see. Captain
Gunilla, before I announce the thanes’ judgement on this Valkyrie, do you wish to speak?’
Gunilla stirred. The gleam in her eyes was
gone. She looked like someone who’d got in
line for the merry-go-round and unexpectedly found herself trapped on a roller
coaster.
‘I –’ She shook her head. ‘No, my lord. I –
I have nothing to add.’
‘Very well,’ said Helgi. ‘Samirah al-Abbas,
for your poor judgement with this einherji
Magnus Chase, and for your past mistakes,
the thanes rule that you be expelled from the
sisterhood of Valkyries. You are hereby
stripped of your powers and privileges.
Return to Midgard in disgrace!’

222/1044

Sam grabbed my arm. ‘Magnus, listen to
me. You have to find the sword. You have to
stop them –’
Like a camera flash, there was a burst of
light, and Sam was gone. Her half-eaten
meal and the breadcrumbs around her seat
were the only signs she’d ever existed.
‘So concludes our feast,’ Helgi announced.
‘I will see you all tomorrow on the field of
battle! Sleep well and dream of glorious
death!’

SEVENTEEN

I Did Not Ask for Biceps

I didn’t sleep much. I definitely didn’t dream
of glorious death. Been there, done that, got
the afterlife.
While I was at dinner, my sofa had been
put back and repaired. I sat on it and
thumbed through my old children’s book of
Norse mythology, but it didn’t have much
about Frey. One tiny picture showed a blond
guy in a tunic frolicking in the woods, a
blonde lady at his side, a couple of cats playing at their feet.
Frey was the god of spring and summer!
read the caption. He was the god of wealth,

225/1044

abundance and fertility. His twin sister,
Freya, the goddess of love, was very pretty!
She had cats!
I tossed the book aside. Great. My dad was
a D-list god who frolicked in the woods. He
was probably eliminated early last season on
Dancing with the Asgardians.
Did it crush me to learn this? Not really.
You might not believe it, but my dad’s identity had never been a big deal to me. It wasn’t
like I ever felt incomplete – like, if only I
knew my dad, my life would make sense. I
knew who I was. I was Natalie Chase’s son.
As for life making sense … I’d seen too much
weirdness to expect that.
Still, I had a lot of items on my I-don’t-getit list. At the very top: how could a homeless
kid have a dad who was the god of abundance and wealth? Talk about a cruel joke.
Also, why would I get targeted by a big bad
dude like Surt? If he was the lord of

226/1044

Muspellheim, High King Roasty Toasty,
shouldn’t he pick on more interesting heroes,
like the children of Thor? At least their dad
had a movie franchise. Frey didn’t even have
his own cats. He had to borrow his sister’s.
And the Sword of Summer … assuming
that was the blade I had pulled from the
Charles River, how had it ended up there?
Why was it so important? Uncle Randolph
had been searching for it for years. Sam’s last
words to me were about finding the sword
again. If it had belonged to my dad, and my
dad was an immortal god, why had he allowed his weapon to sit at the bottom of a
river for a thousand years?
I stared at the empty fireplace. The Norns’
words kept playing in my head, though I
wanted to forget them.
Harbinger of the Wolf. I remembered
what a harbinger was now: something that
signalled the arrival of a powerful force, like

227/1044

a doorman announcing the president, or a
red sky before a hurricane. I did not want to
be the harbinger of the wolf. I’d seen enough
wolves to last me an eternal lifetime. I
wanted to be the harbinger of ice cream, or
falafel.
Wrongly chosen, wrongly slain.

A little late to announce that now. I was a
freaking einherji. My name was on the door.
I had a key to the minibar.
A hero Valhalla cannot contain.

I liked this line better. Maybe it meant I
could bust out of here. Or I guessed it could
mean that the thanes would vaporize me in a
burst of light or feed me to their magical
goat.
Nine days hence the sun must go east,
Ere Sword of Summer unbinds the beast.

228/1044

Those lines bothered me the most. Last I
checked, the sun moved east to west. And
who was the beast? I was betting a wolf, because it’s always a stinking wolf. If the sword
was supposed to let loose a wolf, the sword
should’ve stayed lost.
Some memory nagged at me … a bound
wolf. I stared at the children’s book of mythology, half tempted to pick it up again. But I
was already unsettled enough.
Magnus, listen to me, Sam had said. You
have to find the sword. You have to stop
them.
I felt bad about Samirah al-Abbas. I was
still miffed at her for bringing me here, especially if it had been a mistake, but I didn’t
want to see her kicked out of the Valkyries
because some doctored video made me look
like a doofus. (Okay, more of a doofus than
usual.)

229/1044

I decided I should sleep. I didn’t feel tired,
but if I stayed awake thinking any longer my
brain would overheat.
I tried the bed. Too soft. I ended up in the
atrium, sprawled on the grass, gazing at the
stars through the tree branches.
At some point, I must have fallen asleep.
A sharp sound startled me awake – a
branch cracking. Someone cursed.
Above me, the sky was turning grey in the
predawn light. A few leaves helicoptered
through the air. Branches bobbed as if
something heavy had just scrambled through
them.
I lay still, listening, watching. Nothing.
Had I imagined that voice?
Over by the entrance, a piece of paper slid
under my door.
I sat up groggily.

230/1044

Maybe the management was giving me the
bill and letting me check out. I staggered towards the door.
My hand trembled as I picked up the paper, but it wasn’t a bill. It was a handwritten
note in really nice cursive:
Hi, neighbour.
Join us in lounge 19 for breakfast. Down
the hall to the left. Bring your weapons and
armour.
T.J.

T.J.… Thomas Jefferson Jr, the guy across
the hall.
After the fiasco last night, I didn’t know
why he’d want to invite me to breakfast. I
also didn’t understand why I needed
weapons and armour. Maybe Viking bagels
fought back.
I was tempted to barricade my door and
hide in my room. Perhaps everyone would
leave me alone. Maybe, once all the warriors

231/1044

were busy with their Bikram yoga to the
death, I could sneak out and find an exit to
Boston.
On the other hand, I wanted answers. I
couldn’t shake the idea that, if this was a
place for the brave dead, my mom might be
here somewhere. Or someone might know
which afterlife she had gone to. At least this
guy T.J. seemed friendly. I could hang with
him for a while and see what he could tell
me.
I trudged to the bathroom.
I was afraid the toilet would be some Viking death machine with axe blades and a
flush-operated crossbow, but it worked like a
normal one. It definitely wasn’t any scarier
than the public restrooms in the Common.
The medicine cabinet was stocked with all
my usual toiletries … or at least the toiletries
I used to like when I had a home.

232/1044

And the shower … I tried to remember the
last time I’d had a leisurely hot shower. Sure,
I’d arrived in Valhalla feeling magically drycleaned, but, after a bad night’s sleep in the
atrium, I was ready for a good old-fashioned
scrub down.
I peeled off my layers of shirts and almost
screamed.
What was wrong with my chest? Why did
my arms look that way? What were those
weird bulgy areas?
Usually I avoided looking at my reflection.
I wasn’t somebody I wanted to see on a regular basis. But now I faced the mirror.
My hair was the same, a bit less grimy and
tangled, but still hanging to my jawline in a
curtain of dirty blond, parted in the middle.
You look like Kurt Cobain, my mom used
to tease me. I loved Kurt Cobain, except for
the fact that he died.

233/1044

Well, guess what, Mom? I thought. I have
that in common with him, too, now!
My eyes were grey – more like my cousin
Annabeth’s than my mom’s. They had a
haunted, scary emptiness to them, but that
was normal. The look had served me well on
the streets.
My upper body, however, I hardly recognized. Ever since my bad asthma days when I
was little, I’d always been on the scrawny
side. Even with all the hiking and camping,
I’d had a concave chest, sticking-out ribs and
skin so pale you could trace the road map of
blue veins.
Now … those strange new bulgy areas
looked suspiciously like muscles.
Don’t get me wrong. It wasn’t as dramatic
as turning into Captain America. I was still
lean and pale, but my arms had definition.
My chest didn’t look like it would collapse in
the next strong wind. My skin was smoother,

234/1044

less translucent. All the rashes and nicks and
bites that came from living on the street had
disappeared. Even the scar on my left palm,
where I’d cut myself on a hunting knife at
age ten, had vanished.
I remembered how strong I’d felt when I
first arrived at Valhalla, how I’d tossed my
sofa across the room last night. I hadn’t
really stopped to think about it.
What had Hunding called Valhalla … an
upgrade?
I made a fist.
I’m not sure what came over me. I guess,
when I realized that even my body wasn’t my
own, the anger, fear and uncertainty of the
last twenty-four hours reached critical mass.
I’d been plucked out of my life. I’d been
threatened, humiliated and forcibly upgraded. I hadn’t asked for a suite. I hadn’t
asked for biceps.
I hit the wall. Literally.

235/1044

My fist went straight through the tile, the
plasterboard and a two-by-four stud. I pulled
out my hand. I wriggled my fingers. Nothing
felt broken.
I regarded the fist-shaped hole I’d made
above the towel rail. ‘Yep,’ I grumbled.
‘Housekeeping loves me.’
The shower helped calm me down. Afterwards, wrapped in a fluffy HV-embroidered
bathrobe, I padded to the closet to search for
clothes. Inside were three sets of blue jeans,
three green T-shirts (all marked PROPERTY OF
HOTEL VALHALLA), underwear, socks, a pair of
good running shoes and a sheathed sword.
Leaning against the ironing board was a circular green shield with the golden rune of
Frey painted in the middle.
Okay, then. I guess I knew what I was
wearing today.
I spent ten minutes trying to figure out
how to position the sword’s sheath on my

236/1044

belt. I was left-handed. Did that mean the
sword went on the right? Were left-handed
swords different from right-handed ones?
I attempted to draw the blade and just
about ripped my jeans off. Oh, yeah, I was
going to be a hit on the battlefield.
I practised swinging the sword. I
wondered if it would start humming and
guiding my hand, the way the sword on the
bridge had done when I faced Surt. But no.
This blade seemed to be a regular piece of
non-humming metal with no cruise-control
feature. I managed to sheathe it without losing any fingers. I slung the shield across my
back, the way the warriors at dinner last
night had been wearing theirs. The strap dug
into my neck and made me want to gag.
I looked in the mirror again.
‘You, sir,’ I muttered, ‘look like a huge
dork.’
My reflection did not argue.

237/1044

I went out to find breakfast and kill it with
my sword.

EIGHTEEN

I Do Mighty Combat with
Eggs

‘There he is.’ T.J. rose and grabbed my hand.
‘Sit. Join us. You made quite a first impression last night!’
He was dressed the same as yesterday: a
blue wool army jacket over a green hotel Tshirt, jeans and leather boots.
With him sat the half-troll X, the redhead
Mallory Keen and a guy I guessed was Halfborn Gunderson, who looked like Robinson
Crusoe on steroids. His shirt was a patchwork of animal pelts. His hide trousers were

240/1044

in tatters. Even by Viking standards his
beard was wild, decorated with most of a
cheese omelette.
My four hallmates made room for me at
the table, which felt pretty good.
Compared to the main feast hall, lounge
nineteen was downright intimate. Scattered
around the room were a dozen tables, most
unoccupied. In one corner, a fireplace
crackled in front of a beat-up sofa. Along the
other wall, a buffet table was laden with
every kind of breakfast food imaginable (and
a few kinds I had never imagined).
T.J. and company had parked themselves
in front of a big picture window overlooking
a vast field of ice and swirling snow. It made
no sense, considering that it was summer in
my atrium right down the hall, but I’d
already learned that the hotel’s geography
was wack.

241/1044

‘That’s Niflheim,’ T.J. explained, ‘the
realm of ice. The view changes daily, cycling
through the Nine Worlds.’
‘The Nine Worlds …’ I stared at my
scrambled eggs, wondering which solar system they’d come from. ‘I keep hearing about
nine worlds. Hard to believe.’
Mallory Keen blew icing sugar off her
doughnut. ‘Believe it, newbie. I’ve visited six
of them so far.’
‘Five here.’ Halfborn grinned, showing me
the rest of his cheese omelette. ‘ ’Course,
Midgard hardly counts. That’s the human
world. Been to Alfheim, Nidavellir,
Jotunheim –’
‘Disney World,’ X said.
Mallory sighed. With her red hair, green
eyes, and icing sugar around her mouth, she
reminded me of a reverse-colour-scheme
Joker. ‘For the last time, you numbskull, Disney World is not one of the nine.’

242/1044

‘Why is it called a world, then?’ X nodded
smugly, the argument won, and went back to
his meal, sucking meat from the shell of a
large crustacean.
T.J. pushed his empty plate away.
‘Magnus, I don’t know if it helps, but the
Nine Worlds aren’t really separate planets.
They’re more like … different dimensions,
different layers of reality, all connected by
the World Tree.’
‘Thanks,’ I said. ‘That’s much more
confusing.’
He laughed. ‘Yeah, I guess it is.’
‘The World Tree is the tree in the feast
hall?’
‘Nah,’ Mallory said. ‘The World Tree is
much bigger. You’ll see, sooner or later.’
That sounded ominous. I tried to concentrate on my food, but it was difficult with X
right next to me demolishing a slimy mutant
crab.

243/1044

I pointed at T.J.’s jacket. ‘That’s a Civil
War uniform?’
‘Private in the Fifty-fourth Massachusetts,
my friend. I’m a Boston boy, same as you. I
just got here a little earlier.’
I did the calculations. ‘You died in battle a
hundred and fifty years ago?’
T.J. beamed. ‘The assault on Fort Wagner,
South Carolina. My dad was Tyr, god of courage, law, and trial by combat. My mom was a
runaway slave.’
I tried to fit that into my new world view: a
teenager from the 1860s, the son of a former
slave and a Norse god, who was now having
breakfast with me in an extra-dimensional
hotel.
X belched, which put things in perspective.
‘Gods of Asgard!’ Mallory complained.
‘That smell!’
‘Sorry,’ X grunted.
‘Is your name really X?’ I asked.

244/1044

‘No. My real name is –’ The half-troll said
something that started with Ks and went on
for about thirty seconds.
Halfborn wiped his hands on his pelt shirt.
‘You see? Nobody can pronounce that. We
call him X.’
‘X,’ agreed X.
‘He’s another one of Sam al-Abbas’s acquisitions,’ T.J. said. ‘X stumbled across a
dog fight … one of those illegal ones in,
where, Chicago?’
‘Chee-cah-go,’ affirmed X.
‘He saw what was going on and went nuts.
Started smashing up the place, walloping the
bettors, freeing the animals.’
‘Dogs should fight for themselves,’ X said.
‘Not for greedy humans. They should be wild
and free. They should not be kept in cages.’
I didn’t want to argue with the big guy, but
I wasn’t sure I liked the idea of wild dogs
fighting for themselves. That sounded a lot

245/1044

like wolves – an animal I refused to
harbinge.
‘Anyway,’ T.J. said, ‘it turned into a fullscale battle: X against a bunch of gangsters
with automatic weapons. They finally killed
him, but X took down a lot of scumbags and
freed a lot of dogs. That was what … a month
ago?’
X grunted and continued sucking his
shellfish.
T.J. spread his hands. ‘Samirah judged
him worthy and brought him here. She got
some flak for that decision.’
Mallory snorted. ‘That’s putting it mildly.
A troll in Valhalla. Who could possibly
object?’
‘Half-troll,’ X corrected. ‘That is my better
half, Mallory Keen.’
‘She didn’t mean anything, X,’ T.J. said.
‘It’s just that prejudice dies hard. When I got

246/1044

here in 1863, I wasn’t exactly welcomed with
open arms, either.’
Mallory rolled her eyes. ‘Then you won
them over with your dazzling personality. I
swear, you lot are giving floor nineteen a bad
name. And now we have Magnus.’
Halfborn leaned towards me. ‘Don’t mind
Mallory. She’s a sweetheart, once you get
past the fact that she’s a horrible person.’
‘Shut up, Halfborn.’
The big guy chuckled. ‘She’s just grumpy
because she died trying to disarm a car bomb
with her face.’
Mallory’s ears turned as red as hummingbird nectar. ‘I didn’t – it wasn’t – Argh!’
‘Magnus, don’t worry about that mess last
night,’ continued Halfborn. ‘Folks will forget
about it in a few decades. Believe me, I’ve
seen it all. I died during the Viking invasion
of East Anglia, fought under the banner of

247/1044

Ivar the Boneless. I took twenty arrows in
the chest protecting my thane!’
‘Ouch,’ I said.
Halfborn shrugged. ‘I’ve been here for …
oh, going on twelve hundred years now.’
I stared at him. Despite his bulk and his
beard, Halfborn looked maybe eighteen,
tops. ‘How do you stand it without going
crazy? And why do they call you Halfborn?’
His smile faded. ‘Second question first …
when I was born, I was so big, strong and
ugly that my mother said I looked like I’d
been half born, half carved from rock. The
name stuck.’
‘And you’re still ugly,’ Mallory muttered.
‘As for how to avoid going crazy here …
Some do lose it, Magnus. Waiting for Ragnarok is hard. The trick is to keep busy.
There’s plenty to do here. Me, I’ve learned a
dozen languages, including English. I earned

248/1044

a doctorate in Germanic literature, and I
learned to knit.’
T.J. nodded. ‘That’s why I invited you to
breakfast, Magnus.’
‘To learn knitting?’
‘To keep active! Spending too much time
alone in your room can be dangerous. If you
isolate yourself, you start to fade. Some of
the old-timers …’ He cleared his throat. ‘It
doesn’t matter. You’re here! Just keep showing up every morning until Doomsday, and
you’ll be fine.’
I stared out of the window at the swirling
snow. I thought about Sam’s warning to find
the sword, the Norns chanting that
something bad would happen in nine days.
‘You said you’ve visited the other worlds.
That means you can leave the hotel.’
The group exchanged uneasy glances.
‘Yes,’ Halfborn said. ‘But our main job is to
wait for Ragnarok. Train, train, train.’

249/1044

‘I rode the train at Disney World,’ said X.
Maybe he meant it as a jest. The half-troll
seemed to have two facial expressions: wet
cement and dry cement.
‘Occasionally,’ said T.J., ‘einherjar are sent
into the Nine Worlds on missions.’
‘Tracking down monsters,’ Mallory
offered. ‘Killing giants who cross into
Midgard. Stopping witches and wights. And,
of course, dealing with rogues –’
‘Wights? Rogues?’ I asked.
‘Point is,’ said Halfborn, ‘we only leave
Valhalla under orders from Odin or the
thanes.’
‘But, hypothetically,’ I said, ‘I could go
back to earth, Midgard, whatever –’
‘Hypothetically, yes,’ T.J. said. ‘Look, I
know that business with the Norns must be
driving you bonkers, but we don’t know what
the prophecy means. Give the thanes some

250/1044

time to decide what to do. You can’t rush off
and do something stupid.’
‘Gods forbid,’ said Mallory. ‘We never do
anything stupid. Like that late-night pizza
run to Santarpio’s. That never happened.’
‘Shut up, woman,’ Halfborn growled.
‘Woman?’ Mallory reached for the knife at
her belt. ‘Watch your words, you overgrown
Swedish hamster.’
‘Hold on,’ I said. ‘You guys know how to
sneak out of –’
T.J. coughed loudly. ‘Sorry, I didn’t hear
that. I’m sure you weren’t asking about anything against the rules. Magnus, first of all: if
you returned to Midgard so soon, how would
you explain it to those who knew you? Everyone thinks you’re dead. Usually, if we go
back, we wait until everyone we knew is
dead. It’s easier all the way around. Besides,
it takes a while, sometimes years, for your
einherji strength to develop fully.’

251/1044

I tried to imagine waiting here for years. I
didn’t have many friends or relatives to go
back to. Still, I didn’t want to be stuck here –
learning new languages, knitting sweaters –
for ages. After seeing my cousin Annabeth, I
kind of wanted to reconnect with her before
she died. And if Samirah was right about my
mom not being in Valhalla … I wanted to
find her, wherever she was.
‘But it’s possible to leave without permission,’ I persisted. ‘Maybe not forever, just for
a while.’
T.J. shifted uncomfortably. ‘Valhalla has
doors into every world. The hotel is designed
that way. Most exits are guarded, but … well,
there are a lot of ways to Boston, since Boston is the centre of Midgard.’
I glanced around the table. Nobody was
laughing. ‘It is?’
‘Sure,’ T.J. said. ‘It’s right at the trunk of
the World Tree, the easiest spot from which

252/1044

to access the other worlds. Why do you think
Boston is called the Hub of the Universe?’
‘Wishful thinking?’
‘No. Mortals have always known there was
something about that location, even if they
couldn’t put their finger on what it was. The
Vikings searched for the centre of the world
for years. They knew the entrance to Asgard
was in the west. That’s one reason they kept
exploring into North America. When they
met the Native Americans –’
‘We called them the skraelings,’ Halfborn
said. ‘Vicious fighters. I liked them.’
‘– the natives had all sorts of stories about
how strong the spirit world was in this area.
Later, when the Puritans settled, well … John
Winthrop’s vision of a shining “City on a
Hill”? That wasn’t just a metaphor. He had a
vision of Asgard, a glimpse into the other
worlds. And the Salem witch trials? Hysteria
caused by magic seeping into Midgard.

253/1044

Edgar Allan Poe was born in Boston. It’s no
accident his most famous poem was about a
raven, one of Odin’s sacred animals.’
‘Enough.’ Mallory gave me a disgusted
look. ‘T.J. will take forever when answering a
yes/no question. The answer is yes, Magnus.
It is possible to leave, with or without
permission.’
X cracked a crab claw. ‘You would not be
immortal.’
‘Yeah,’ T.J. said. ‘That’s the second big
problem. In Valhalla, you can’t die – not permanently. You’ll just keep getting resurrected. It’s part of the training.’
I remembered the guy who had got impaled in the lobby and dragged off by wolves.
Hunding had said he would be fine again by
dinner.
‘But outside of Valhalla?’
‘Out in the Nine Worlds,’ T.J. said, ‘you’re
still an einherji. You’re faster and stronger

254/1044

and tougher than any regular mortal. But if
you die out there you stay dead. Your soul
might go to Helheim. Or you might simply
dissolve into the primordial void – Ginnungagap. Hard to know. It’s not worth the risk.’
‘Unless …’ Halfborn picked some egg out
of his beard. ‘Unless he really did find the
sword of Frey and the legends are true –’
‘It’s Magnus’s first day,’ T.J. said. ‘Let’s not
go into that. He’s already freaked out
enough.’
‘Freak me out more,’ I said. ‘What legends
exactly?’
In the hallway, a horn blasted. At the other
tables, einherjar started to get up and clear
their plates.
Halfborn rubbed his hands eagerly. ‘Talking will have to wait. It’s battle time!’
‘Battle time,’ X agreed.

255/1044

T.J. grimaced. ‘Magnus, we should probably warn you about the first-day initiation.
Don’t be discouraged if –’
‘Oh, shush,’ said Mallory. ‘Don’t spoil the
surprise!’ She gave me an icing-sugar smile.
‘I can’t wait to see the new boy get
dismembered!’

NINETEEN

Do Not Call Me
Beantown. Like, Ever

I told my new friends I was allergic to dismemberment. They just laughed and herded
me towards the combat arena. This is why I
don’t like making new friends.
The battlefield was so huge I couldn’t process what I was seeing.
Back in the good old days when I was a
street kid, I used to sleep on rooftops in the
summertime. I could see the entire cityscape
of Boston from Fenway Park to Bunker Hill.
Valhalla’s battlefield was bigger than that. It

258/1044

offered maybe three square miles of interesting places to die, all contained within the
hotel like an interior courtyard.
On all four sides rose the walls of the
building – cliffs of white marble and goldrailed balconies, some hung with banners,
some decorated with shields, some fitted
with catapults. The upper floors seemed to
dissolve in the hazy glow of the sky, as blank
white as a fluorescent light.
In the centre of the field loomed a few
craggy hills. Clumps of forest marbled the
landscape. The outer rim was mostly rolling
pastures, with a river as wide as the Charles
snaking through. Several villages dotted the
riverbank, maybe for those who preferred
their warfare urban.
From hundreds of doors in the walls
around the field, battalions of warriors were
streaming in, their weapons and armour
glinting in the harsh light. Some einherjar

259/1044

wore full plate mail like medieval knights.
Others wore chain-mail shirts, breeches and
combat boots. A few sported camo fatigues
and AK-47s. One guy wore nothing but a pair
of Speedos. He’d painted himself blue and
was armed only with a baseball bat. Across
his chest were the words COME AT ME, BRO.
‘I feel underdressed,’ I said.
X cracked his knuckles. ‘Armour does not
make victory. Neither do weapons.’
Easy for him to say. He was larger than
some sovereign nations.
Halfborn Gunderson was also taking the
minimalist approach. He’d stripped down to
nothing but his leggings, though he did sport
a pair of vicious-looking double-bladed axes.
Standing next to anyone else, Halfborn
would’ve looked massive. Next to X, he
looked like a toddler … with a beard, abs and
axes.

260/1044

T.J. fastened his bayonet to his rifle. ‘Magnus, if you want more than the basic equipment, you’ll have to capture it or trade for it.
The hotel armouries take red gold, or they
work on a barter system.’
‘Is that how you got your rifle?’
‘Nah, this is the weapon I died with. I
hardly ever fire it. Bullets don’t have much
effect on einherjar. Those guys out there with
the assault rifles? That’s all flash and noise.
They’re the least dangerous people on the
field. But this bayonet? It’s bone steel, a gift
from my father. Bone steel works just fine.’
‘Bone steel.’
‘Yeah. You’ll learn.’
My sword hand was already sweating. My
shield felt much too flimsy. ‘So which groups
are we fighting against?’
Halfborn clapped me on the back. ‘All of
them! Vikings fight in small groups, my
friend. We are your shield brothers.’

261/1044

‘And shield sister,’ Mallory said. ‘Though
some of us are shield idiots.’
Halfborn ignored her. ‘Stick with us, Magnus, and … well, you won’t do fine. You’ll get
killed quickly. But stick with us anyway.
We’ll wade into battle and slaughter as many
as possible!’
‘That’s your plan?’
Halfborn tilted his head. ‘Why would I
have a plan?’
‘Oh, sometimes we do,’ said T.J. ‘Wednesdays are siege warfare. That’s more complicated. Thursdays they bring out the dragons.’
Mallory drew her sword and serrated dagger. ‘Today is free-for-all combat. I love
Tuesdays.’
From a thousand different balconies,
horns blasted. The einherjar charged into
battle.

262/1044

Until that morning, I’d never understood
the term bloodbath. Within a few minutes,
we were literally slipping in the stuff.
We’d just stepped onto the field when an
axe flew out of nowhere and stuck in my
shield, the blade going right through the
wood above my arm.
Mallory yelled and threw her knife, which
sank into the axe thrower’s chest. He fell to
his knees, laughing. ‘Good one!’ Then he collapsed, dead.
Halfborn waded through enemies, his axes
whirling, chopping off heads and limbs until
he looked like he’d been playing paintball
with only red paint. It was disgusting. And
horrifying. And the most disturbing part?
The einherjar treated it like a game. They
killed with glee. They died as if someone had
just taken down their avatar in Call of Duty.
I’d never liked that game.

263/1044

‘Ah, that sucks,’ one guy muttered as he
studied the four arrows in his chest.
Another yelled, ‘I’ll get you tomorrow,
Trixie!’ before falling sideways, a spear stuck
through his gut.
T.J. sang ‘The Battle Hymn of the Republic’ while he stabbed and parried with his
bayonet.
X smashed through one group after another. A dozen arrows now stuck out of his back
like porcupine quills, but they didn’t seem to
bother him. Every time his fist connected, an
einherji turned two-dimensional.
As for me, I shuffled along in abject terror,
my shield raised, my sword dragging. I’d
been told that death here wasn’t permanent,
but I had a hard time believing it. A bunch of
warriors with sharp, pointy objects were trying to kill me. I didn’t want to be killed.
I managed to parry a sword strike. I deflected a spear with my shield. I had a clear

264/1044

opening to stab one girl whose guard was
down, but I just couldn’t make myself do it.
That was a mistake. Her axe bit into my
thigh. Pain flared all the way up to my neck.
Mallory cut the girl down. ‘Come on,
Chase, keep moving! You’ll get used to the
pain after a while.’
‘Great.’ I grimaced. ‘Something to look forward to.’
T.J. jabbed his bayonet through the faceplate of a medieval knight. ‘Let’s take that
hill!’ He pointed to a nearby ridge at the edge
of the woods.
‘Why?’ I yelled.
‘Because it’s a hill!’
‘He loves taking hills,’ Mallory grumbled.
‘It’s a Civil War thing.’
We waded through the battle, heading for
the high ground. My thigh still hurt, but the
bleeding had stopped. Was that normal?

265/1044

T.J. raised his rifle. He yelled ‘Charge!’ just
as a javelin ran him through from behind.
‘T.J!’ I yelled.
He caught my eye, managed a weak smile,
then face-planted in the mud.
‘For Frigg’s sake!’ Mallory cursed. ‘Come
on, newbie.’
She grabbed my arm and pulled me along.
More javelins sailed over my head.
‘You guys do this every day?’ I demanded.
‘No. Like we told you – Thursdays are
dragons.’
‘But –’
‘Hey, Beantown, the whole point is to get
used to the horrors of battle. You think this
is bad? Wait until we actually have to fight at
Ragnarok.’
‘Why am I Beantown? T.J.’s from Boston.
Why isn’t he Beantown?’
‘Because T.J. is slightly less annoying.’

266/1044

We reached the edge of the woods. X and
Halfborn guarded our backs, slowing down
the pursuing horde. And the enemies were a
horde now. All the scattered groups within
sight had stopped fighting one another and
were after us. Some pointed at me. Some
called my name, and not in a friendly way.
‘Yeah, they’ve spotted you.’ Mallory
sighed. ‘When I said I wanted to see you
eviscerated, I didn’t mean I wanted to be
standing next to you. Oh, well.’
I almost asked why everyone was after me.
But I got it. I was a newbie. Of course the
other einherjar would gang up on me and the
other newcomers. Lars Ahlstrom was probably already decapitated. Dede might be running around with her arms cut off. The veteran einherjar would make this as painful and
terrifying for us as possible to see how we
handled ourselves. That made me angry.

267/1044

We climbed the hill, weaving from tree to
tree for cover. Halfborn threw himself into a
group of twenty guys who were following us.
He destroyed them all. He came up laughing,
an insane light in his eyes. He was bleeding
from a dozen wounds. A dagger stuck out of
his chest, right over his heart.
‘How is he not dead yet?’ I asked.
‘He’s a berserker.’ Mallory glanced back,
her expression a mix of disdain and exasperation and something else … admiration?
‘That idiot will keep fighting until he is literally hacked to pieces.’
Something clicked in my head. Mallory
liked Halfborn. You don’t call somebody an
idiot that many times unless you’re really into them. Under different circumstances, I
might have teased her, but while she was distracted there was a wet thwack. An arrow
sprouted from her neck.

268/1044

She scowled at me as if to say, Totally
your fault.
She collapsed. I knelt at her side, putting
my hand on her neck. I could feel the life
seeping out of her. I could sense the severed
artery, the fading heartbeat, all the damage
that had to be mended. My fingers seemed to
grow warmer. If I had a little more time –
‘Look out!’ shouted X.
I raised my shield. A sword clanged
against it. I pushed back, knocking the attacker downhill. My arms ached. My head
was throbbing, but somehow I got to my feet.
Halfborn was forty yards away, surrounded by a mob of warriors all jabbing him
with spears, shooting him full of arrows.
Somehow he kept fighting, but even he
wouldn’t be able to stand much longer.
X ripped a guy’s AK-47 out of his hands
and smacked him over the head with it.

269/1044

‘Go, Magnus Beantown,’ said the half-troll.
‘Take the crest for floor nineteen!’
‘My nickname will not be Beantown,’ I
muttered. ‘I refuse.’
I stumbled uphill until I reached the summit. I put my back against a big oak tree
while X smashed and backhanded and headbutted Vikings into oblivion.
An arrow hit my shoulder, pinning me to
the tree. The pain almost made me black out,
but I snapped the shaft and pulled myself
free. The bleeding stopped instantly. I felt
the wound closing as if somebody had filled
it with hot wax.
A shadow passed over me – something
large and dark hurtling from the sky. It took
me a millisecond to realize it was a boulder,
probably shot from a balcony catapult. It
took me another millisecond to realize where
it would land.

270/1044

Too late. Before I could shout a warning to
X, the half-troll and a dozen other einherjar
disappeared under a twenty-ton chunk of
limestone, the side of which was painted:
WITH LOVE FROM FLOOR 63.
A hundred warriors stared at the rock.
Leaves and broken twigs fluttered around
them. Then the einherjar all turned towards
me.
Another arrow hit me in the chest. I
screamed, more in rage than in pain, and
pulled it out.
‘Wow,’ one of the Vikings commented.
‘He’s a fast healer.’
‘Try a spear,’ someone suggested. ‘Try two
spears.’
They spoke as if I wasn’t worth addressing
– as if I were a cornered animal they could
experiment with.
Twenty or thirty einherjar raised their
weapons. The anger inside me exploded. I

271/1044

shouted, expelling energy like the shock
wave from a bomb. Bowstrings snapped.
Swords fell out of their owners’ hands.
Spears and guns and axes went flying into
the trees.
As quickly as it started, the surge of power
shut off. All around me, a hundred einherjar
had been stripped of their weapons.
The blue-painted guy stood in the front
row, his baseball bat at his feet. He stared at
me in shock. ‘What just happened?’
The warrior next to him had an eye patch
and red leather armour decorated with silver
curlicues. Cautiously, he crouched and retrieved his fallen axe.
‘Alf seidr,’ said Eye Patch. ‘Nicely done,
son of Frey. I haven’t seen a trick like that in
centuries. But bone steel is better.’
My eyes crossed as his axe blade spun towards my face. Then everything went dark.

TWENTY

Come to the Dark Side.
We Have Pop-Tarts

A familiar voice said, ‘Dead again, eh?’
I opened my eyes. I was standing in a pavilion ringed with grey stone columns. Outside was nothing but empty sky. The air was
thin. Cold wind whipped across the marble
floor, stirring the fire in the central hearth,
making the flames gutter in the braziers on
either side of the tall dais. Three steps led up
to a double throne – a loveseat of white wood
carved with intricate shapes of animals, birds
and tree branches. The seat itself was lined

274/1044

with ermine. Sprawling across it, eating PopTarts from a silver wrapper, was the man in
the Red Sox jersey.
‘Welcome to Hlidskjalf.’ He grinned, his
scarred lips like the sides of a zipper. ‘The
High Seat of Odin.’
‘You’re not Odin,’ I said, using process of
elimination. ‘You’re Loki.’
Sox Man chuckled. ‘Nothing escapes your
keen intellect.’
‘First, what are we doing here? Second,
why is Odin’s throne named Lid Scalp?’
‘Hlidskjalf. Put an h at the beginning and
an f at the end. On that first letter you have
to sound like you’re hawking spit.’
‘On further reflection, I don’t care.’
‘You should. This is where it all started.
That’s the answer to your second question –
why we’re here.’ He patted the seat next to
him. ‘Join me. Have a Pop-Tart.’
‘Uh, no thanks.’

275/1044

‘Your loss.’ He broke off the edge of a
pastry and tossed it into his mouth. ‘This
purple icing … I don’t know what flavour it’s
supposed to be, but it is insanely good.’
My pulse throbbed in my neck, which was
strange since I was dreaming, and probably
also dead.
Loki’s eyes unnerved me. They had that
same intense glow as Sam’s, but Sam kept
the flames under control. Loki’s gaze flitted
restlessly like the fire in the hearth, pushed
by the wind, looking for anything it could set
ablaze.
‘Frey once sat here.’ He stroked the ermine
fur. ‘Do you know the story?’
‘No, but … isn’t it illegal for anyone to sit
there except Odin?’
‘Oh, yes. Well, Odin and Frigg, the king
and queen. They can sit here and see anywhere in the Nine Worlds. They merely have
to concentrate and they will find whatever

276/1044

they are looking for. But if anyone else sits
here …’ He made tsk-tsk sounds. ‘The
throne’s magic can be a terrible curse. I certainly would never risk it if this weren’t an illusion. But your father did. It was his one
moment of rebellion.’ Loki took another bite
of purple Pop-Tart. ‘I always admired him
for that.’
‘And?’
‘And, instead of seeing what he was looking for, he saw what he most desired. It
ruined his life. It’s the reason he lost his
sword. He –’ Loki winced. ‘Excuse me.’
He turned his head, his features contorting
like he was about to sneeze. Then he let loose
a scream of agony. When he faced me again,
wisps of steam rose from the scar tissue
across the bridge of his nose.
‘Sorry,’ he said. ‘Every so often the poison
splashes in my eyes.’

277/1044

‘The poison.’ I remembered a fragment of
a myth. ‘You killed somebody. The gods captured you and tied you up. There was
something about poison. Where are you now,
really?’
He gave me that twisted grin. ‘Right where
I always am. The gods had me, ah, properly
restrained. But that’s not important. I can
still send out splinters of my essence from
time to time – like I’m doing now, to speak
with my favourite friends!’
‘Just because you’re wearing a Sox jersey
does not mean we’re friends.’
‘I’m hurt!’ His eyes sparkled. ‘My daughter
Samirah saw something in you. We could
help each other.’
‘You ordered her to take me to Valhalla?’
‘Oh, no. That wasn’t my idea. You, Magnus
Chase, are of interest to many different
parties. Some of them are not as charming or
helpful as I.’

278/1044

‘How about being charming and helpful to
your daughter? She got kicked out of the
Valkyries for choosing me.’
His smile faded. ‘That’s the gods for you.
They banished me, too, and how many times
did I save their hides? Don’t worry about
Samirah. She is strong. She’ll be fine. I’m
more worried about you.’
Cold wind blew through the pavilion, so
strong it pushed me a few inches across the
polished stone floor.
Loki crumpled his Pop-Tart wrapper.
‘You’ll be waking up soon. Before you go,
some advice.’
‘I don’t suppose I can refuse.’
‘The Sword of Summer,’ Loki said. ‘When
your father sat on this throne, what he saw
doomed him. He gave his sword away. It
passed to his servant and messenger,
Skirnir.’

279/1044

For a moment I was back on the Longfellow Bridge, the sword humming in my hand
as if trying to speak.
‘Uncle Randolph mentioned Skirnir,’ I
said. ‘His descendant was in that shipwreck.’
Loki pantomimed wild applause. ‘And
there the sword lay for a thousand years,
waiting for someone to reclaim it – someone
who had the right to wield the blade.’
‘Me.’
‘Ah, but you aren’t the only one who can
use the sword. We know what will happen at
Ragnarok. The Norns have told us our fates.
Frey … poor Frey, because of the choices he
made, will die at the hands of Surt. The lord
of the fire giants will cut him down with his
own lost sword.’
A spike of pain hit me between the eyes,
right about where the einherji’s axe had
killed me. ‘That’s why Surt wants the sword.
So he’ll be ready for Ragnarok.’

280/1044

‘Not only that. He’ll use the sword to set in
motion a chain of events to hasten Doomsday. In eight days, unless you stop him, he
will cut loose my son, the Wolf.’
‘Your son …?’ My arms were evaporating.
My eyesight grew hazy. Too many questions
crowded into my head. ‘Wait … aren’t you
destined to fight against the gods at Ragnarok, too?’
‘Yes, but that was the gods’ choice, not
mine. The thing about fate, Magnus: even if
we can’t change the big picture, our choices
can alter the details. That’s how we rebel
against destiny, how we make our mark.
What will you choose to do?’
His image flickered. For a moment I saw
him spread-eagle on a slab of stone, his
wrists and ankles tied with slimy ropes, his
body writhing in pain. Then I saw him in a
hospital bed, a female doctor leaning over
him, her hand resting gently on his forehead.

281/1044

She looked like an older version of Sam –
curls of dark hair escaping from a scarlet
headscarf, her mouth set tight with concern.
Loki appeared on the throne again,
brushing Pop-Tart crumbs from his Red Sox
jersey. ‘I won’t tell you what to do, Magnus.
That’s the difference between me and the
other gods. I’ll only ask you this question:
when you get a chance to sit on Odin’s
throne – and that day is coming – will you
search for your heart’s desire, knowing it
may doom you as it doomed your father?
Think on that, son of Frey. Perhaps we’ll
speak again, if you survive the next eight
days.’
My dream changed. Loki vanished. The
braziers burst, showering hot coals across
the dais, and the High Seat of Odin erupted
in flames. The clouds turned into rolling
banks of volcanic ash. Above the burning

282/1044

throne, two glowing red eyes appeared in the
smoke.
YOU. The voice of Surt washed over me
like a flamethrower. YOU HAVE ONLY
DELAYED ME. YOU HAVE EARNED A
MORE PAINFUL, MORE PERMANENT
DEATH.
I tried to speak. The heat sucked the oxygen from my lungs. My lips cracked and
blistered.
Surt laughed. THE WOLF THINKS YOU
MAY STILL BE USEFUL. I DO NOT. WHEN
WE MEET AGAIN, YOU WILL BURN, SON
OF FREY. YOU AND YOUR FRIENDS WILL
BE MY TINDER. YOU WILL START THE
FIRE THAT BURNS THE NINE WORLDS.
The smoke thickened. I couldn’t breathe,
couldn’t see.
My eyes flew open. I bolted upright, gasping for air. I was in bed in my hotel room.
Surt was gone. I touched my face, but it

283/1044

wasn’t burned. No axe was embedded there.
All my battlefield wounds had vanished.
Still, my whole body was buzzing with
alarm. I felt like I’d fallen asleep on active
train tracks and the Acela Express had just
roared past.
The dream was already erasing itself. I
struggled to hold on to the specifics: the
throne of Odin; Loki and Pop-Tarts; my son,
the Wolf; Surt promising to burn the Nine
Worlds. Trying to make sense of it was even
more painful than getting an axe in my face.
Someone knocked on my door.
Thinking it might be one of my hallmates,
I leaped out of bed and ran to answer. I
threw open the door, found myself face-toface with the Valkyrie Gunilla and only then
realized I was wearing nothing but
underwear.
Her face turned magenta. Her jaw muscles
knotted. ‘Oh.’

284/1044

‘Captain Gorilla,’ I said. ‘What an honour.’
She recovered quickly, glaring at me like
she was trying to activate her freeze-ray vision. ‘Magnus Chase. I, um – you resurrected
with incredible speed.’
From her tone, I guessed that she hadn’t
expected to find me here. But then why had
she knocked?
‘I wasn’t timing my resurrection,’ I said.
‘Was it fast?’
‘Very.’ She glanced past me, maybe looking
for something. ‘We have a few hours before
dinner. Perhaps I could give you a tour of the
hotel, since your own Valkyrie has been
dismissed.’
‘You mean since you got her dismissed.’
Gunilla turned up her palms. ‘I don’t control the Norns. They decide all our fates.’
‘That’s convenient.’ I remembered what
Loki had said: Our choices can alter the details. That’s how we rebel against destiny.

285/1044

‘What about me? Have you – I mean the
Norns – decided my fate?’
Gunilla scowled. Her posture was stiff and
uneasy. Something was bothering her –
maybe even scaring her.
‘The thanes are discussing your situation
now.’ She unhooked the key ring from her
belt. ‘Take a tour with me. We can talk. If I
understand you better, I may be able to
speak to the thanes on your behalf. Unless,
of course, you want to take your chances
without my help. You might get lucky. The
thanes might sentence you to bellhop duty
for a few centuries. Or washing dishes in the
kitchen.’
The last thing I wanted was quality time
with Gunilla. On the other hand, a tour of the
hotel might show me some important features – like the exits. Also, after the dream
I’d just had, I didn’t want to be alone.

286/1044

Besides, I could imagine how many dirty
dishes would need washing after three
rounds of dinner in the feast hall.
‘I’ll take the tour,’ I said. ‘But I should
probably put some clothes on first.’

TWENTY-ONE

Gunilla Gets Blowtorched
and It’s Not Funny. Okay,
It’s a Little Bit Funny

The main thing I discovered: Valhalla
needed GPS. Even Gunilla got turned around
in the endless corridors, banquet halls, gardens and lounges.
At one point we were riding in a service elevator when Gunilla said, ‘Here’s the food
court.’
The doors opened and a wall of flames engulfed us both.

289/1044

My heart leaped into my throat. I thought
Surt had found me. Gunilla screamed and
staggered backwards. I smashed random
buttons until the doors shut. Then I did my
best to put out the burning hem of Gunilla’s
dress.
‘You okay?’ My pulse was still racing.
Gunilla’s arms were covered with patches of
steaming red skin.
‘My skin will heal,’ Gunilla said. ‘My pride
may not. That – that was Muspellheim, not
the food court.’
I wondered if Surt had engineered our
little detour somehow, or if elevator doors in
Valhalla often opened into the world of fire. I
wasn’t sure which possibility was more
disturbing.
The tightness in Gunilla’s voice told me
how much pain she was in. I remembered
standing over Mallory Keen when she fell in
battle – the way I’d been able to sense the

290/1044

damage and how it could have been mended
if I’d had more time.
I knelt next to the Valkyrie. ‘May I?’
‘What are you –’
I touched her forearm.
My fingers began to steam, drawing the
heat from her skin. The redness faded. Her
burns disappeared. Even the singed tip of
her nose healed.
Gunilla stared at me as if I’d sprouted
horns. ‘How did you …? You weren’t burned,
either. How?’
‘I don’t know.’ My head spun with exhaustion. ‘Good luck? Healthy living?’
I tried to stand and promptly collapsed.
‘Whoa, son of Frey.’ Gunilla grabbed my
arm.
The elevator doors opened again. This
time we really were at a food court. The
smells of lemon chicken and pizza wafted in.

291/1044

‘Let’s keep walking,’ Gunilla said. ‘Clear
your head.’
We got some strange looks as we stumbled
through the dining area, me leaning against
the Valkyrie captain for support, Gunilla’s
dress still smoking and tattered.
We turned into a corridor lined with conference rooms. Inside one, a guy in studded
leather armour was giving a PowerPoint
presentation to a dozen warriors, explaining
the weaknesses of mountain trolls.
A few doors down, Valkyries in glittering
party hats socialized over cake and ice
cream. The birthday candle was shaped like
the number 500.
‘I think I’m okay now,’ I told Gunilla.
‘Thanks.’
I wobbled a few steps on my own but managed to stay upright.
‘Your healing abilities are remarkable,’
Gunilla said. ‘Frey is the god of abundance

292/1044

and fertility, growth and vitality – I guess
that explains it. Still, I’ve never seen an einherji who can heal himself so quickly, much
less heal others.’
‘Your guess is as good as mine,’ I said.
‘Normally I have trouble just opening BandAids.’
‘And your immunity to fire?’
I concentrated on the carpet designs, keeping one foot in front of the other. I could
walk now, but healing Gunilla’s burns had
left me feeling like I’d just had a bad case of
pneumonia.
‘I don’t think it’s fire immunity,’ I said.
‘I’ve burned myself before. I just … I have a
high tolerance for extreme temperatures.
Cold. Heat. The same thing happened on the
Longfellow Bridge when I walked into the
flames …’ My voice faltered. I remembered
that Gunilla had edited that video and made

293/1044

me look like a fool. ‘But you know all about
that.’
Gunilla didn’t seem to notice the sarcasm.
She absently stroked one of the hammers in
her bandolier as if it were a kitten. ‘Perhaps
… In the beginning of creation, only two
worlds existed: Muspellheim and Niflheim,
fire and ice. Life rose between those extremes. Frey is the god of moderate climes
and the growing season. He represents the
middle ground. Perhaps that’s why you can
resist heat and cold.’ She shook her head. ‘I
don’t know, Magnus Chase. It has been a
long time since I met a child of Frey.’
‘Why? Are we not allowed in Valhalla?’
‘Oh, we have some children of Frey from
the old days. The kings of Sweden were his
descendants, for instance. But we haven’t
seen a new one in Valhalla for centuries. Frey
is Vanir, for one thing.’
‘Is that bad? Surt called me Vanir-spawn.’

294/1044

‘That wasn’t Surt.’
I thought about my dream: those glowing
eyes in the smoke. ‘It was Surt.’
Gunilla looked like she wanted to argue,
but she let it drop. ‘Whatever the case, the
gods are divided into two tribes. The Aesir
are mostly gods of war: Odin, Thor, Tyr and
the rest. The Vanir are more like the gods of
nature: Frey, Freya, their father, Njord.
That’s an oversimplification, but anyway –
long ago, the two tribes had a war. They almost destroyed the Nine Worlds. They finally settled their differences. They intermarried. They joined forces against the giants. But still they’re different clans. Some
Vanir have palaces in Asgard, the seat of the
Aesir gods, but the Vanir also have their own
world, Vanaheim. When a child of the Vanir
dies bravely, they don’t usually go to Valhalla. More often they go to the Vanir afterlife, overseen by the goddess Freya.’

295/1044

It took me a minute to digest all that.
Clans of gods. Wars. Whatever. But that last
part, the Vanir afterlife … ‘You’re telling me
there’s another place like Valhalla, except for
Vanir children, and I’m not there? What if
that’s where my mom went? What if I was
supposed to –’
Gunilla took my arm. Her blue eyes were
intense with anger. ‘That’s right, Magnus.
Think about what Samirah al-Abbas has
done. I’m not saying all children of the Vanir
go to Folkvanger –’
‘You put them in a Volkswagen?’
‘Folkvanger. It’s the name of Freya’s hall
for the slain.’
‘Oh.’
‘My point is, you could have gone there. It
would’ve been more likely. Half the honoured dead go to Odin. Half go to Freya.
That was part of the agreement that ended
the gods’ war aeons ago. So why did Samirah

296/1044

bring you here? Wrongly chosen, wrongly
slain. She’s the daughter of Loki, the father
of evil. She cannot be trusted.’
I wasn’t sure how to answer. I hadn’t
known Samirah all that long, but she seemed
pretty nice. Of course, so did her dad, Loki …
‘You may not believe this,’ Gunilla said,
‘but I’m giving you the benefit of the doubt. I
think you may be innocent of Samirah’s
plans.’
‘What plans?’
She laughed bitterly. ‘To hasten Doomsday, of course. To bring the war before we
are ready. That’s what Loki wants.’
I was tempted to protest that Loki had told
me otherwise. He seemed more interested in
stopping Surt from getting my dad’s sword …
But I decided it wouldn’t be wise to tell
Gunilla I’d been having chats with the father
of evil.

297/1044

‘If you hate Sam so much,’ I said, ‘why did
you let her be a Valkyrie in the first place?’
‘That wasn’t my choice. I oversee the
Valkyries, but Odin picks them. Samirah alAbbas was the last Valkyrie he chose, two
years ago, under what were … unusual circumstances. The All-Father has not appeared
in Valhalla since.’
‘You think Sam killed him?’
I meant it as a joke, but Gunilla actually
seemed to consider it. ‘I think Samirah
should never have been chosen as a Valkyrie.
I think she’s working for her father as a spy
and a saboteur. Getting her kicked out of
Valhalla was the best thing I ever did.’
‘Wow.’
‘Magnus, you don’t know her. There was
another child of Loki here once. He – he
wasn’t what he seemed. He –’ She stopped
herself, looking like someone had just
stepped on her heart. ‘Never mind. I swore to

298/1044

myself I wouldn’t be fooled again. I intend to
delay Ragnarok for as long as possible.’
The edge of fear had crept back into her
voice. She didn’t sound much like the daughter of a war god.
‘Why delay?’ I asked. ‘Isn’t Ragnarok what
you’re all training for? It’s like your big
graduation party.’
‘You don’t understand,’ she said. ‘Come.
There’s something I need to show you. We
will go through the gift shop.’
When she said gift shop, I imagined a glorified closet selling cheap Valhalla souvenirs.
Instead, it was a five-level department store
combined with a convention-centre trade
show. We passed through a supermarket, a
clothing boutique with the latest in Viking
fashions and an IKEA outlet (naturally).
Most of the showroom floor was a maze of
stalls, kiosks and workshops. Bearded guys
in leather aprons stood outside their forges

299/1044

offering free samples of arrowheads. There
were specialized merchants for shields,
spears, crossbows, helmets and drinking
cups (lots and lots of drinking cups). Several
of the larger booths had full-size boats for
sale.
I patted the hull of a sixty-foot warship. ‘I
don’t think this would fit in my bathtub.’
‘We have several lakes and rivers in Valhalla,’ Gunilla said. ‘There’s also the Whitewater Rafting Experience on floor twelve. All
einherjar should know how to fight at sea as
well as on land.’
I pointed to a riding ring where a dozen
horses were tethered. ‘And those? You can
ride a horse through the hallways?’
‘Of course,’ said Gunilla. ‘We’re petfriendly. But notice, Magnus – the lack of
weapons. The scarcity of armour.’
‘You’re kidding, right? This place has thousands of weapons for sale.’

300/1044

‘Not enough,’ Gunilla said. ‘Not for
Ragnarok.’
She led me down the Nordic Knick-knacks
aisle to a big iron door marked: AUTHORIZED
PERSONNEL ONLY.
She slipped one of her keys into the lock. ‘I
don’t show this to many people. It’s too
disturbing.’
‘Not another wall of fire, is it?’
‘Worse.’
Behind the door was a set of stairs. Then
another set of stairs. Then another set of
stairs. By the time we reached the top, I’d
lost count of how many flights. My upgraded
einherji legs felt like overcooked linguine.
At last we stepped out onto a narrow
balcony.
‘This,’ Gunilla said, ‘is my favourite view.’
I couldn’t answer. I was too busy trying
not to die from vertigo.

301/1044

The balcony ringed the opening in the roof
above the Hall of the Slain. The tree
Laeradr’s topmost branches stretched upward, making a green dome the size of
Spaceship Earth at Epcot. Inside, far below,
hotel staff scurried around the tables like termites, getting things ready for dinner.
From the outer edge of the balcony, the
roofline of Valhalla sloped away – a thatch of
gold shields blazing red in the evening sun. I
felt like I was standing on the surface of a
metal planet.
‘Why don’t you show this to people?’ I
asked. ‘It’s … well, intimidating, but it’s also
beautiful.’
‘Over here.’ Gunilla pulled me to a spot
where I could gaze down between two sections of roof.
My eyeballs felt like they were going to implode. I flashed back to a presentation my
sixth-grade science teacher once gave about

302/1044

the size of the universe. He explained how
vast the earth was, then described how that
was nothing compared to the solar system,
which in turn was nothing compared to the
galaxy, et cetera, et cetera, until I felt as significant as a speck on the underarm of a flea.
Stretching out around Valhalla, gleaming
to the horizon, was a city of palaces, each as
big and impressive as the hotel.
‘Asgard,’ Gunilla said. ‘The realm of the
gods.’
I saw roofs made entirely of silver ingots,
hammered-bronze doors big enough to fly a
B-1 bomber through, sturdy stone towers
that pierced the clouds. Streets were paved
in gold. Each garden was as vast as Boston
Harbor. And circling the edge of the city
were white ramparts that made the Great
Wall of China look like a baby fence.
At the very edge of my vision, the city’s
widest avenue ran through a gateway in the

303/1044

walls. On the far side, the ground dissolved
into multicoloured light – a roadway of prismatic fire.
‘The Bifrost,’ Gunilla said. ‘The rainbow
bridge leading from Asgard to Midgard.’
I’d heard about the Bifrost Bridge. In my
children’s myth book, it was a seven-colour
pastel arc with happy bunny rabbits dancing
around the base. This bridge had no happy
bunnies. It was terrifying. It was a rainbow
in the way a nuclear explosion was a
mushroom.
‘Only the gods may cross over,’ Gunilla
said. ‘Anyone else would burn the moment
they set foot on it.’
‘But … we’re in Asgard?’
‘Of course. Valhalla is one of Odin’s halls.
That’s why, within the hotel, the einherjar
are immortal.’

304/1044

‘So you can go down there and see the
gods, sell Girl Scout cookies door-to-door or
whatever?’
Gunilla curled her lip. ‘Even gazing upon
Asgard, you have no sense of reverence.’
‘Not really, no.’
‘Without the express permission of Odin,
we aren’t allowed to visit the city of the gods
– at least not until the day of Ragnarok,
when we will defend the gates.’
‘But you can fly.’
‘It’s forbidden to go there. If I tried, I
would fall from the sky. You’re missing the
point, Magnus. Look at the city again. What
do you notice?’
I scanned the neighbourhood, trying to see
past all the silver and gold and the scary
huge architecture. In one window, rich
drapes hung in tatters. Along the streets, fire
braziers stood empty and cold. The statues in
one garden were completely overgrown with

305/1044

thorn bushes. The streets were deserted. No
fires burned in any of the windows.
‘Where is everybody?’ I asked.
‘Exactly. I would not be selling many Girl
Scout cookies.’
‘You mean the gods are gone?’
Gunilla turned towards me, her string of
hammers glinting orange in the sunset.
‘Some may be slumbering. Some are roaming
the Nine Worlds. Some still appear from
time to time. The fact is, we don’t know
what’s going on. I’ve been in Valhalla five
hundred years, and I have never seen the
gods so quiet, so inactive. The last two years
…’
She plucked a leaf from a low-hanging
branch of Laeradr. ‘Two years ago,
something changed. The Valkyries and
thanes all felt it. The barriers between the
Nine Worlds began to weaken. Frost giants
and fire giants raided Midgard more

306/1044

frequently. Monsters from Helheim broke into the worlds of the living. The gods grew
distant and silent. This was around the time
when Samirah became a Valkyrie – the last
time we saw Odin. It was also when your
mother died.’
A raven circled overhead. Two more joined
it. I thought about my mom – how she used
to joke that birds of prey were stalking us
when we went hiking. They think we’re
dead. Quick, start dancing!
At the moment I wasn’t tempted to dance.
I wanted to borrow Gunilla’s hammers and
knock the birds out of the sky.
‘You think there’s a connection between
those things?’ I asked.
‘All I know … we are poorly prepared for
Ragnarok. Then you arrive. The Norns issue
dire warnings, calling you the Harbinger of
the Wolf. That’s not good, Magnus. Samirah
al-Abbas may have been watching you for

307/1044

years, waiting for the right moment to insert
you into Valhalla.’
‘Insert me?’
‘Those two friends of yours on the bridge,
the ones who had been monitoring you since
you became homeless, perhaps they were
working with her.’
‘You mean Blitz and Hearth? They’re
homeless guys.’
‘Are they? Don’t you find it strange they
looked after you so carefully?’
I wanted to tell her to go to Helheim, but
Blitz and Hearth had always seemed a little
… unusual. Then again, when you live on the
streets the definition of normal gets a little
fuzzy.
Gunilla took my arm. ‘Magnus, I didn’t believe it at first, but if that was Surt on the
bridge, if you did find the Sword of Summer
… then you’re being used by the forces of
evil. If Samirah al-Abbas wants you to

308/1044

retrieve the sword, then that’s exactly what
you cannot do. Stay in Valhalla. Let the
thanes deal with this prophecy. Swear you’ll
do this, and I will speak to the thanes on
your behalf. I’ll convince them that you can
be trusted.’
‘Do I detect an or else?’
‘Only this: by tomorrow morning, the
thanes will announce their decision regarding your fate. If we cannot trust you, then we
will have to take precautions. We must know
whose side you’re on.’
I looked down at the empty golden streets.
I thought about Sam al-Abbas dragging me
through the cold void, putting her career on
the line because she thought I was brave.
You have potential, Magnus Chase. Don’t
prove me wrong. Then she’d been vaporized
in the feast hall thanks to Gunilla’s edited
blooper reel.

309/1044

I pulled my arm away. ‘You said Frey is
about the middle ground between fire and
ice. Maybe this isn’t about choosing sides.
Maybe I don’t want to pick an extreme.’
Gunilla’s expression rolled shut like a
storm window. ‘I can be a powerful enemy,
Magnus Chase. I will warn you one time: if
you follow the plans of Loki, if you seek to
hasten Ragnarok, I will destroy you.’
I tried to meet her eyes, and to ignore my
lungs flopping around in my chest. ‘I’ll keep
that in mind.’
Below us, the dinner horn echoed through
the feast hall.
‘The tour is over,’ Gunilla announced.
‘From this point on, Magnus Chase, I will
guide you no more.’
She leaped over the side of the balcony and
flew down through the branches, leaving me
to find my own way back. Without GPS.

TWENTY-TWO

My Friends Fall Out of a
Tree

Fortunately, a friendly berserker found me
wandering through the spa on the hundred
and twelfth floor. He’d just had the gentleman’s pedicure (‘Just Because You Kill
People Doesn’t Mean Your Feet Should!’)
and was happy to lead me back to the
elevators.
By the time I reached the feast hall, dinner
was under way. I navigated towards X – who
was hard to miss even in the huge crowd –
and joined my hallmates from floor nineteen.

312/1044

We traded stories about the morning’s
battle.
‘I hear you used alf seidr!’ Halfborn said.
‘Impressive!’
I’d almost forgotten about the energy blast
that had knocked everybody’s weapons away.
‘Yeah, uh … what exactly is alf seidr?’
‘Elf magic,’ Mallory said. ‘Sneaky Vanirstyle witchcraft unfit for a true warrior.’ She
punched me in the arm. ‘I like you better
already.’
I tried for a smile, though I wasn’t sure
how I’d managed to wield elf magic. As far as
I knew, I was not an elf. I thought about the
way I resisted extreme temperatures, and the
way I’d healed Gunilla in the elevator … was
that alf seidr, too? Maybe it came from being
a son of Frey, though I didn’t understand
how the powers were related.

313/1044

T.J. complimented me on taking the crest
of the hill. X complimented me on staying
alive longer than five minutes.
It was good to feel like part of the group,
but I didn’t pay much attention to their conversation. My head was still buzzing from the
tour with Gunilla and the dream of Loki at
the throne of Odin.
At the head table, Gunilla occasionally
murmured something to Helgi, and the manager would scowl in my direction. I kept
waiting for him to call me up and put me on
grape-peeling duty with Hunding, but I
guess he was contemplating some better
punishment.
Tomorrow morning, Gunilla had warned,
we will have to take precautions.
At the end of dinner, a couple of newbies
were welcomed to Valhalla. Their videos
were suitably heroic. No Norns showed up.

314/1044

No Valkyries got banished in disgrace. No
butts were shot with squeaky arrows.
As the crowds filed out of the feast hall,
T.J. clapped me on the shoulder. ‘Get some
rest. Another glorious death tomorrow!’
‘Yippee,’ I said.
Back in my room, I couldn’t sleep. I spent
hours pacing around like a zoo animal. I
didn’t want to wait for the thanes’ judgement
in the morning. I’d seen how wisely they
judged when they exiled Sam.
But what choice did I have? Sneak around
the hotel randomly opening doors, hoping to
find one that led back to Boston? Even if I
succeeded, there was no guarantee I’d be allowed to go back to my luxurious life as a
homeless kid. Gunilla or Surt or some other
Norse nasty might track me down again.
We must know whose side you are on,
Gunilla had said.

315/1044

I was on my side. I didn’t want to get
wrapped up in some Viking Doomsday, but
something told me it was too late. My mom
had died two years ago, around the same
time a bunch of other bad stuff was breaking
loose in the Nine Worlds. With my luck,
there was a connection. If I wanted justice
for my mother – if I wanted to find out what
had happened to her – I couldn’t go back to
hiding under a bridge.
I also couldn’t keep hanging out in Valhalla, taking Swedish lessons and watching
PowerPoint presentations on killing trolls.
At about five in the morning, I finally gave
up on sleeping. I went to the restroom to
wash my face. Clean towels hung on the rod.
The hole in the wall had been repaired. I
wondered if it had been done by magic or if
some poor schmuck had had to fix it as a
punishment from the thanes. Maybe tomorrow I’d be the one plastering the wall.

316/1044

I walked to the atrium and stared at the
stars through the trees. I wondered what sky
I was looking at – what world, what
constellations.
The branches rustled. Something dark and
man-shaped toppled out of the tree. He
landed at my feet with a nasty crunch.
‘OW!’ he wailed. ‘Stupid gravity!’
My old buddy Blitz lay on his back, moaning and cradling his left arm.
A second person dropped lightly to the
grass – Hearth, dressed in his usual black
leather clothes and candy-striped scarf. He
signed, Hi.
I stared at them. ‘What are you – how did
you –?’ I started to grin. I’d never been happier to see anyone.
‘Arm!’ Blitz yelped. ‘Broken!’
‘Right.’ I knelt, trying to focus. ‘I might be
able to heal this.’
‘Might?’

317/1044

‘Wait … did you get a makeover?’
‘You’re asking about my wardrobe?’
‘Well, yeah.’ I’d never seen Blitz look so
nice.
His chaotic hair had been washed and
combed back. His beard was trimmed. His
Cro-Magnon unibrow had been plucked and
waxed. Only his zigzag nose had not been
cosmetically corrected.
As for the clothes, he’d apparently robbed
several high-end boutiques on Newbury
Street. His boots were alligator leather. His
black wool suit was tailored to fit his stocky
five-feet-five frame and looked lovely with
his dark skin tone. Under the jacket, he was
rocking a charcoal paisley waistcoat with a
gold watch chain, a smart turquoise shirt and
a skinny bolo tie. He looked like a very short,
well-groomed African-American cowboy
hitman.

318/1044

Hearth clapped to get my attention. He
signed, Arm. Fix?
‘Right. Sorry.’ I placed my hand gently on
Blitz’s forearm. I could feel the fracture under the skin. I willed it to mend. Click. Blitz
yelped as the bone moved back into place.
‘Try it now,’ I said.
Blitz moved the arm. His expression
changed from pain to surprise. ‘That actually
worked!’
Hearth looked even more shocked. He
signed, Magic? How?
‘I’ve been wondering that myself,’ I said.
‘Guys, don’t take this the wrong way, because
I’m really glad to see you. But why are you
falling out of my trees?’
‘Kid,’ Blitz said, ‘for the past twenty-four
hours we’ve been climbing all over the World
Tree looking for you. We thought we found
you last night, but –’

319/1044

‘I think you might have,’ I said. ‘Just before dawn I heard somebody moving in the
branches.’
Blitz turned to Hearth. ‘I told you that was
the right room!’
Hearth rolled his eyes and signed too fast
for me to read.
‘Oh, please,’ Blitz said. ‘Your idea, my idea
– it doesn’t matter. The point is, we’re here,
and Magnus is alive! Well … technically he’s
dead. But he’s alive. Which means the boss
might not kill us!’
‘The boss?’ I asked.
Blitz developed a tic in his eye. ‘Yeah. We
have a confession to make.’
‘You’re not really homeless,’ I said. ‘Last
night, one of the thanes saw you guys on
video and –’
Video? Hearth signed.

320/1044

‘Yeah. Valkyrie Vision. Anyway, this thane
called you a dwarf and an elf. I’m guessing –’
I pointed at Blitz – ‘you’re the dwarf?’
‘Typical,’ Blitz grumbled. ‘Assume I’m the
dwarf because I’m short.’
‘So you’re not the dwarf?’
He sighed. ‘No. I’m the dwarf.’
‘And you …’ I looked at Hearth, but I
couldn’t even make myself say it. I’d hung
out with this guy for two years. He’d taught
me curses in sign language. We’d eaten
burritos out of trash cans together. What
kind of elf does that?
E-L-F. Hearth signed the individual letters. Sometimes spelled A-L-F.
‘But … you guys don’t look that different
from humans.’
‘Actually,’ Blitz said, ‘humans don’t look
that different from dwarves and elves.’
‘I can’t believe I’m having this conversation, but you’re not that short. Like, for a

321/1044

dwarf. You could pass for a regular short
human.’
‘Which I’ve been doing,’ Blitz said, ‘for two
years now. Dwarves come in different sizes,
just like humans. I happen to be a svartalf.’
‘A fart elf?’
‘Gah! Clean your ears, kid. A svartalf. It
means dark elf. I’m from Svartalfheim.’
‘Um, I thought you just said you’re a
dwarf.’
‘Dark elves aren’t actually elves, kid. It’s …
what do you call it? A misnomer. We’re a
subset of dwarves.’
‘Well, that certainly clears things up.’
Hearth developed a faint smile, which for
him was the equivalent of rolling on the floor
laughing. He signed, Fart elf.
Blitz pointedly ignored him. ‘Svartalfs tend
to be taller than your average Nidavellir
dwarves. Plus we’re devilishly handsome.

322/1044

But that’s not important right now. Hearthstone and I are here to help you.’
‘Hearthstone?’
Hearth nodded. My full name. He is B-LI-T-Z-E-N.
‘Kid, we don’t have much time. We’ve been
watching you for the last two years, trying to
keep you safe.’
‘For your boss.’
‘That’s right.’
‘And who is your boss?’
‘That’s … classified. But he’s one of the
good guys. He’s the head of our organization,
dedicated to delaying Ragnarok as long as
possible. And you, my friend, have been his
most important project.’
‘So, just taking a wild guess here … you’re
not working for Loki?’
Blitzen looked outraged. Hearth signed
one of those curses he’d taught me.

323/1044

‘That was uncalled for, kid.’ Blitzen sounded genuinely hurt. ‘I dressed up like a
homeless person every day for two years for
you. I let my personal hygiene go to Helheim. You know how long I had to stay in the
bubble bath every morning to get the smell
out?’
‘Sorry. So … were you working with
Samirah, the Valkyrie?’
Another curse sign from Hearthstone. The
one who took you? No. She made things
hard for us.
Actually the literal signs were more like:
HER. TOOK. YOU. MADE. DIFFICULT. US.
But I’d become fairly good at interpreting.
‘You weren’t supposed to die, kid,’ said Blitzen. ‘Our job was to protect you. But now …
well, you’re an einherji. Maybe we can still
make this work. We’ve got to get you out of
here. We have to find that sword.’
‘Let’s go, then,’ I said.

324/1044

‘Now, don’t argue,’ Blitzen said. ‘I know
you’re in warriors’ paradise and it’s all very
new and exciting –’
‘Blitz, I said sure.’
The dwarf blinked. ‘But I had this whole
speech prepared.’
‘No need. I trust you.’
The strange thing? I was telling the truth.
Maybe Blitzen and Hearthstone were professional stalkers who’d been keeping an eye
on me for a top-secret anti-Ragnarok organization. Maybe their idea of protecting me involved attacking the lord of the fire giants
with cheap plastic toys. Maybe they weren’t
even the same species as me.
But they’d stuck by me while I was homeless. They were my best friends. Yes … that’s
how messed up my life was.
‘Well, then.’ Blitzen brushed the grass
from his paisley waistcoat. ‘We’ll just climb
back into the World Tree before –’

325/1044

From somewhere above, an explosive yap!
reverberated through the room. It sounded
like a rabid six-thousand-pound Boston terrier choking on a mammoth bone.
Hearthstone’s eyes widened. The sound
was so loud he’d probably felt the vibrations
through his shoes.
‘Gods almighty!’ Blitzen grabbed my arm.
Together with Hearthstone, he pulled me
away from the atrium. ‘Kid, please tell me
you know another way out of this hotel. Because we aren’t using the tree.’
Another yap shook the room. Broken
branches tumbled to the floor.
‘Wh-what’s up there?’ I asked, my knees
shaking. I thought about the Norns’ prophecy, naming me a harbinger of evil. ‘Is it –
the Wolf?’
‘Oh, much worse,’ Blitzen said. ‘It’s the
Squirrel.’

TWENTY-THREE

I Recycle Myself

When someone says, It’s the Squirrel, you
don’t ask questions. You run. The barking
alone was enough to scare the mead out of
me.
I grabbed my hotel-issued sword on the
way out. Since I was wearing green silk Valhalla pajamas, I doubted I would need it. If I
had to fight anyone, they would die laughing
before I ever drew the blade.
We burst into the hallway to find T.J. and
Mallory already standing there, bleary-eyed
and hastily dressed.

328/1044

‘What was that sound?’ Mallory scowled at
me. ‘Why do you have a dwarf and an elf in
your room?’
‘SQUIRREL!’ Blitzen yelled, slamming my
door shut.
Hearth said the same thing in sign language – a gesture that looked disturbingly
like a set of mandibles rending flesh.
T.J. looked like he’d been slapped across
the face. ‘Magnus, what have you done?’
‘I need to leave the hotel. Now. Please
don’t stop us.’
Mallory cursed in what was maybe Gaelic.
Our little hallway group was a veritable United Nations of Cussing.
‘We won’t stop you,’ she said. ‘This is going
to get us laundry duty for a decade, but we’ll
help you.’
I stared at her. ‘Why? You’ve known me
less than a day.’

329/1044

‘Long enough to know you’re an idiot,’ she
grumbled.
‘What she’s trying to say,’ T.J. offered, ‘is
that hallmates always protect each other.
We’ll cover your escape.’
The door of my room shook. Cracks
spiderwebbed from the nameplate. A decorative spear fell off the wall of the corridor.
‘X!’ T.J. called. ‘Help!’
The half-troll’s door exploded off its
hinges. X lumbered into the hallway as if
he’d been standing just inside, waiting for
the call. ‘Yes?’
T.J. pointed. ‘Magnus’s door. Squirrel.’
‘Okay.’
X marched over and shoved his back
against my door. It shuddered again, but X
held firm. Enraged barking echoed from
inside.

330/1044

Halfborn Gunderson stumbled out of his
room wearing nothing but smiley-face
boxers, double-bladed axes in his hands.
‘What’s going on?’ He glowered at Blitz
and Hearth. ‘Should I kill the dwarf and the
elf?’
‘No!’ Blitzen yelped. ‘Don’t kill the dwarf
and the elf!’
‘They’re with me,’ I said. ‘We’re leaving.’
‘Squirrel,’ T.J. explained.
Halfborn’s shaggy eyebrows achieved orbit. ‘Squirrel as in squirrel squirrel?’
‘Squirrel squirrel,’ Mallory confirmed.
‘And I’m surrounded by moron morons.’
A raven soared down the hall. It landed on
the nearest light fixture and squawked at me
accusingly.
‘Well, that’s great,’ Mallory said. ‘The
ravens have sensed your friends’ intrusion.
That means the Valkyries won’t be far
behind.’

331/1044

From the direction of the elevator banks,
half a dozen howls pierced the air.
‘And those would be Odin’s wolves,’ Halfborn said. ‘Very friendly unless you’re trespassing or leaving the hotel without permission, in which case they’ll tear you apart.’
An unmanly sob started to build in my
throat. I could accept being killed by a squirrel, or an army of Valkyries, or even another
axe in my face, but not wolves. My legs
threatened to give out beneath me.
‘Blitz and Hearth –’ my voice trembled –
‘is there any alarm you guys failed to set off?’
Not fair, Hearth signed. We avoided the
tree mines.
‘Tree mines?’ I wasn’t sure I’d understood
him correctly.
Halfborn Gunderson hefted his axe. ‘I’ll
slow down the wolves. Good luck, Magnus!’

332/1044

He charged down the hall screaming,
‘DEATH!’ while the smiley faces rippled on
his boxer shorts.
Mallory’s face turned red – with embarrassment or delight, I couldn’t tell. ‘I’ll stay
with X in case the squirrel breaks through,’
she said. ‘T.J., you take them to recycling.’
‘Yeah.’
‘Recycling?’ Blitz asked.
Mallory drew her sword. ‘Magnus, I can’t
say it’s been a pleasure. You’re a true pain in
the nári. Now get out of here.’
The door of my room shuddered again.
Plaster rained from the ceiling.
‘The squirrel is strong,’ X grunted. ‘Hurry.’
T.J. fixed his bayonet. ‘Let’s go.’
He led us down the corridor, his blue
Union jacket over his PJs. I got a feeling he
probably slept in that jacket. Behind us,
wolves howled and Halfborn Gunderson bellowed in Old Norse.

333/1044

As we ran, a few einherjar opened their
doors to see what was going on. When they
spotted T.J. with his bayonet, they ducked
back inside.
Left, right, right, left – I lost track of the
turns. Another raven shot past, cawing angrily. I tried to swat it.
‘Don’t,’ T.J. warned. ‘They’re sacred to
Odin.’
We were just passing a T in the hallway
when a voice shouted, ‘MAGNUS!’
I made the mistake of looking.
To our left, fifty feet away, Gunilla stood in
full armour, a hammer in either hand. ‘Take
another step,’ she snarled, ‘and I will destroy
you.’
T.J. glanced at me. ‘You three keep going.
Next right, there’s a chute marked
“recycling”. Jump in.’
‘But –’

334/1044

‘No time.’ T.J. grinned. ‘Go kill some rebs
for me – or monsters – or whatever.’
He pointed his rifle at the Valkyrie,
shouted, ‘Fifty-fourth Massachusetts!’ and
charged.
Hearth grabbed my arm and pulled me
along. Blitz found the recycling chute and
yanked it open. ‘GO, GO!’
Hearthstone dived in head first.
‘You next, kid,’ said the dwarf.
I hesitated. The smell coming out of the
chute reminded me of my dumpster-diving
days. Suddenly the comforts of the Hotel
Valhalla didn’t seem so bad.
Then more wolves howled, closer this
time, and I recycled myself.

TWENTY-FOUR

You Had One Job

Turns out Valhalla had been sending its recycling to home plate at Fenway, which could
explain any problems the Red Sox were having with their offensive line-up.
Hearthstone was just getting to his feet
when I landed on top of him and knocked
him flat. Before I could extricate myself, Blitzen ploughed into my chest. I pushed him
off and rolled away just in case anyone else
decided to drop out of the sky.
I struggled to my feet. ‘Why are we in Fenway Park?’

337/1044

‘Don’t ask me.’ Blitzen sighed dismally.
His nice wool suit looked like it had passed
through the digestive tract of a snail. ‘The
doors in and out of Valhalla are notoriously
wonky. At least we’re in Midgard.’
Rows of red bleachers stood empty and silent, uncomfortably similar to the Feast Hall
of the Slain before the einherjar marched in.
The field was covered in a patchwork of
frozen tarps that crunched under my feet.
It must have been around six in the morning. The eastern sky was just starting to turn
grey. My breath steamed in the air.
‘What were we running from?’ I asked.
‘What kind of mutant squirrel –’
‘Ratatosk,’ Blitz said. ‘The bane of the
World Tree. Anyone who dares climb Yggdrasil’s branches sooner or later has to deal
with that monster. Count yourself lucky we
escaped.’

338/1044

Hearthstone pointed towards the dawn.
He signed, Sun. Bad for Blitzen.
Blitz squinted. ‘You’re right. After that
business on the bridge, I can’t stand any
more direct exposure.’
‘What do you mean?’ I looked more closely
at his face. ‘Are you turning grey?’
Blitzen looked away, but there was no
doubt. His cheeks had lightened to the colour of wet clay. ‘Kid, you may have noticed I
never hung around with you much during
the day?’
‘I … yeah. It was like Hearth took the day
shift. You took the night shift.’
‘Exactly. Dwarves are subterranean
creatures. Sunlight is deadly to us. Mind you,
not as deadly as it is to trolls. I can stand a
little bit, but if I’m out for too long I start to
… uh, petrify.’
I remembered the fight on Longfellow
Bridge, how Blitzen had been wearing a

339/1044

broad-brimmed hat, coat, gloves and
sunglasses – a strange fashion statement, especially with the MAKE WAY FOR DUCKLINGS
sign. ‘If you cover up, will you be okay?’
‘It helps. Thick clothing, sunscreen, et cetera. But at the moment –’ he gestured to his
clothes – ‘I’m not prepared. I dropped my
supply pack somewhere in the World Tree.’
Hearthstone signed, After bridge, his legs
turned to stone. No walking until night.
A lump formed in my throat. Blitz and
Hearth’s attempt to protect me on the Longfellow Bridge had been pretty ridiculous, but
they’d tried. Just by being out in the daytime, Blitzen had risked his life.
As many questions as I had, as messed up
as my life (death?) was at the moment,
knowing that Blitzen was in danger again for
my sake readjusted my priorities.
‘Let’s get you someplace dark,’ I said.

340/1044

The easiest option was the Green Monster
– the famous home-run-blocking four-storey
wall along the left outfield. I’d been behind it
once before on a school trip – first grade,
maybe? I remembered there were service
doors under the scoreboard.
I found one unlocked, and we slipped
inside.
There wasn’t much to see – just metal
scaffolding, stacks of green number cards
hanging on the wall, and the stadium’s concrete ribs tattooed with a hundred years of
graffiti. The space had one important requirement, though: it was dark.
Blitzen sat on a pile of mats and pulled off
his boots. Acorns spilled out. His socks were
grey paisley, matching his waistcoat.
The socks amazed me as much as anything
I’d encountered in Valhalla. ‘Blitz, what’s
with the outfit? You look so … spiffy.’

341/1044

He puffed up his chest. ‘Thank you, Magnus. It hasn’t been easy dressing like a bum
the last two years. No offence, of course.’
‘Of course.’
‘This is how I usually dress. I take my appearance very seriously. I’ll admit I’m a bit of
a clothes horse.’
Hearth made a sound between a sneeze
and a snort. He signed, A bit?
‘Oh, be quiet,’ Blitz grumbled. ‘Who
bought you that scarf, eh?’ He turned to me
for support. ‘I told Hearth he needed a
splash of colour. The black clothes. The
platinum-blond hair. The red-striped scarf
makes a bold statement, don’t you think?’
‘Uh … sure,’ I said. ‘As long as I don’t have
to wear it. Or the paisley socks.’
‘Don’t be silly. Patterned fabric would look
terrible on you.’ Blitz frowned at his boot.
‘What were we talking about again?’

342/1044

‘How about why you’ve been watching me
for the last two years?’
Hearth signed, Told you. The boss.
‘Not Loki,’ I said. ‘Odin, then?’
Blitz laughed. ‘No. The Capo is even
smarter than Odin. He likes to work behind
the scenes, stay anonymous. He assigned us
to watch you and, uh –’ he cleared his throat
– ‘keep you alive.’
‘Ah.’
‘Yeah.’ Blitzen shook the acorns out of his
other boot. ‘We had one job. We failed.
“Keep him alive,” said the Capo. “Watch him.
Protect him if needed, but don’t interfere
with his choices. He’s important to the plan.”
’
‘The plan.’
‘The Capo knows stuff. The future, for instance. He does his best to nudge events in
the right direction, keep the Nine Worlds
from spiralling into chaos and exploding.’

343/1044

‘That sounds like a good plan.’
‘He told us you were the son of Frey. He
didn’t go into details, but he was very insistent: you were important, had to be protected.
When you died … well, I’m just glad we
found you in Valhalla. Maybe all isn’t lost.
Now we’ve got to report to the Capo and get
new orders.’
Hearthstone signed, And hope he doesn’t
kill us.
‘That, too.’ Blitzen didn’t sound optimistic.
‘The thing is, Magnus, until we talk to the
boss, I can’t really go into many details.’
‘Even though I’m important to the plan.’
That’s why we can’t, Hearth signed.
‘What about what happened after I fell off
the bridge? Can you tell me that?’
Blitz picked a leaf out of his beard. ‘Well,
Surt disappeared into the water with you.’
‘It was Surt.’

344/1044

‘Oh, yeah. And I gotta say, nice job with
that. A mortal taking down the lord of the
fire giants? Even if you died doing it, that
was impressive.’
‘So … I killed him?’
No such luck, Hearth signed.
‘Yeah,’ Blitz agreed. ‘But fire giants don’t
do well in icy water. I imagine the impact
shocked him right back to Muspellheim. And
cutting off his nose … that was brilliant. It’ll
take him a while to regain enough strength
to travel between worlds.’
A few days, Hearth guessed.
‘Maybe longer,’ Blitz said.
I looked back and forth between them, two
non-humans discussing the mechanics of
travelling between worlds the way somebody
else might debate how long it would take to
fix a carburettor.
‘You guys got away okay, obviously,’ I said.
‘What about Randolph?’

345/1044

Hearthstone wrinkled his nose. Your
uncle. Annoying, but fine.
‘Kid, you saved lives,’ Blitzen said. ‘There
were a lot of injuries, a lot of damage, but no
mortals died – um, except you. The last time
Surt visited Midgard, it didn’t go so well.’
Great Chicago Fire, Hearth signed.
‘Yeah,’ said Blitz. ‘Anyway, the Boston explosions made national news. The humans
are still investigating. They’re speculating the
damage was caused by meteor strikes.’
I remember thinking that myself at first.
And later wondering whether Surt had been
responsible for them all. ‘But dozens of
people saw Surt on the bridge! At least one
guy caught him on video.’
Blitz shrugged. ‘You’d be amazed what
mortals don’t see. Not just humans. Dwarves
and elves are just as bad. Besides, giants are
experts at glamour.’

346/1044

‘Glamour. I’m guessing you don’t mean
fashion.’
‘No. Giants are horrible at fashion. I mean
glamour like illusions. Giants are magic by
nature. They can manipulate your senses
without even trying. One time a giant made
Hearthstone think I was a warthog, and
Hearth almost killed me.’
No more about the warthog! Hearthstone
pleaded.
‘So, anyway,’ Blitz said, ‘you fell in the
river and died. The emergency services retrieved your body, but –’
‘My body …’
Hearthstone pulled a newspaper clipping
from his jacket pocket and handed it to me.
I read my own obituary. There was my
class picture from fifth grade – my hair in
my eyes, my uncomfortable why-am-I-here
smile, my ratty DROPKICK MURPHYS T-shirt.
The obituary didn’t say much. Nothing about

347/1044

my two-year disappearance, my homelessness, my mom’s death. Just: Untimely demise. Survived by two uncles and a cousin.
Private service to be held.
‘But my body is here,’ I said, touching my
chest. ‘I have a body.’
‘A new and improved body,’ Blitz agreed,
squeezing my biceps in admiration. ‘They retrieved your old body. Hearth and I did our
own search of the river. There was no sign of
Surt. Worse … there was no sign of the
sword. If it’s not at the bottom of the river
again –’
‘Could Randolph have found it?’ I asked.
Hearthstone shook his head. We watched
him. Doesn’t have it.
‘Then Surt has the sword,’ I guessed.
Blitz shuddered. ‘Let’s not assume that.
There’s still a chance it’s with your old body.’
‘Why would it be?’

348/1044

Blitz pointed to Hearth. ‘Ask him. He’s the
expert at magic.’
Hard to explain in signs, Hearth gestured.
A magic sword stays with you. You claimed
it.
‘But … I didn’t.’
You summoned it, Hearth signed. Held it
first, before Surt. Hope that means Surt
didn’t get it. Don’t know why the sword
didn’t go to Valhalla.
‘I wasn’t holding the sword when I hit the
river,’ I said. ‘It slipped out of my hand.’
‘Ah.’ Blitz nodded. ‘That might be why.
Still, the sword would traditionally go into
your grave, or get burned on your pyre. So
there’s a decent chance it will materialize
next to your dead body. We need to look in
your coffin.’
My skin crawled. ‘You want me to go to my
own funeral?’
Hearth signed, No. We go before.

349/1044

‘According to your obituary notice,’ Blitz
said, ‘your body is at the funeral home today
for viewing hours. The service isn’t until tonight. If you go now, you should have the
place to yourself. The building isn’t open yet,
and you won’t exactly have mourners lining
up outside.’
‘Thanks a lot.’
Blitzen tugged on his boots. ‘I’ll go talk to
the boss. On the way, I’ll pop by Svartalfheim
and pick up some proper anti-sunlight
supplies.’
‘You’ll pop by the world of the dark elves?’
‘Yeah. It’s not as hard as it sounds. I’ve
had a lot of practice, and Boston is at the
centre of Yggdrasil. Slipping between worlds
is easy here. One time Hearth and I stepped
off a kerb in Kendall Square and fell into
Niflheim by accident.’
That was cold, Hearth signed.

350/1044

‘While I’m gone,’ Blitz said, ‘Hearthstone
will take you to the funeral home. I’ll meet
you … where?’
Arlington – nearest T stop, Hearth signed.
‘Good.’ Blitzen stood. ‘Get that sword, kid
… and be careful. Outside Valhalla, you can
die like anybody else. The last thing we need
to explain to the boss is two Magnus Chase
corpses.’

TWENTY-FIVE

My Funeral Director
Dresses Me Funny

One good thing about being homeless: I
knew where to find free clothes. Hearth and I
raided a charity drop box on Charlesgate so I
wouldn’t have to walk around town in my
PJs. Soon I was resplendent in stonewashed
jeans, a hunting jacket and a T-shirt
peppered with holes. I looked more like Kurt
Cobain than ever, except I doubt Cobain ever
wore a shirt that read: WIGGLES ROCK & ROLL
PRESCHOOL TOUR! The really disturbing thing

353/1044

was that they made shirts like that in my
size.
I held up my hotel-issued sword. ‘Hearth,
what about this? I doubt the cops will like me
walking around with a three-foot blade.’
Glamour, Hearth signed. Attach it to your
belt.
As soon as I did, the weapon shrank and
melted into a simple loop of chain, which
was only slightly less fashionable than the
Wiggles T-shirt.
‘Great,’ I said. ‘Now my humiliation is
complete.’
Still a sword, Hearth signed. Mortals are
not good at seeing magical things. Between
Ice and Fire is Mist, G-i-n-n-u-n-g-a-g-a-p.
Obscures appearances. Hard to explain in
signs.
‘Okay.’ I remembered what Gunilla had
told me about the worlds forming between
ice and fire, and how Frey represented the

354/1044

temperate zone in between. Apparently,
though, Frey’s children didn’t inherit an innate understanding of what the heck that
meant.
I read my obituary again for the address of
the funeral home. ‘Let’s go pay our respects
to me.’
It was a long, cold walk. The temperature
didn’t bother me, but Hearth shivered in his
leather jacket. His lips were cracked and
peeling. His nose was runny. From all the
fantasy books and movies I had devoured in
middle school, I’d got an impression of elves
as noble creatures of unearthly beauty.
Hearthstone looked more like an anaemic
college kid who hadn’t eaten in a few weeks.
Still … I began to notice non-human details about him. His pupils were strangely reflective, like a cat’s. Under his translucent
skin, his veins were more green than blue.
And, despite his dishevelled appearance, he

355/1044

didn’t reek like a normal homeless person –
body odour, alcohol, stale grease. He smelled
more like pine needles and woodsmoke. How
had I not realized that before?
I wanted to ask him about elves, but walking and talking in sign language don’t mix.
Nor could Hearth read lips very well on the
move. I kind of liked that, actually. You
couldn’t multitask while talking to him. The
dialogue required one hundred per cent focus. If all conversations were like that, I imagined people wouldn’t say so much stupid
garbage.
We were passing Copley Square when he
pulled me into the doorway of an office
building.
Gómez, he signed. Wait.
Gómez was a beat cop who knew us by
sight. He didn’t know my real name, but if
he’d seen a recent picture of me on the news
I would have a hard time explaining why I

356/1044

wasn’t dead. Also, Gómez wasn’t the friendliest guy.
I tapped Hearth’s shoulder for attention.
‘What’s it like … where you’re from?’
Hearth’s expression turned guarded. Alfheim not so different. Only brighter. No
night.
‘No night … like, ever?’
No night. The first time I saw a sunset …
He hesitated, then splayed both hands in
front of his chest like he was having a heart
attack: the sign for scared.
I tried to imagine living in a world where it
was always daytime, then watching the sun
disappear in a wash of blood-coloured light
on the horizon.
‘That would be freaky,’ I decided. ‘But
don’t elves have stuff humans would be
scared of? Like … alf seidr?’
A light kindled in Hearth’s eyes. How do
you know that term?

357/1044

‘Uh … yesterday on the battlefield, somebody said I did it.’ I told him about the blast
that had knocked everyone’s weapons away.
‘And when I healed Blitz’s arm, or walked into that wall of flames on the Longfellow
Bridge … I wondered if it was all the same
kind of magic.’
Hearth seemed to take longer than usual
to process my words.
Not sure. His gestures were smaller, more
careful. Alf seidr can be many things – usually peaceful magic. Healing. Growing.
Stopping violence. It cannot be learned. Not
like rune magic. You have alf seidr in your
blood, or you do not. You are son of Frey.
Maybe have some of his abilities.
‘Frey is an elf?’
Hearth shook his head. Frey is the lord of
Alfheim, our patron god. Vanir are close to
elves. Vanir were the source of all alf seidr.

358/1044

‘Past tense? Don’t elves still talk to trees
and speak with birds and stuff?’
Hearth grunted with irritation. He peeked
around the corner to check on our neighbourhood policeman.
Alfheim not like that, he signed. Not for
centuries. Almost no one is born with alf
seidr. No one practises magic. Most elves
think Midgard is a myth. Humans live in
castles and wear plate mail and tights.
‘Maybe a thousand years ago.’
Hearth nodded. Back then, our worlds interacted more. Now, both worlds have
changed. Elves spend most of their time
staring at screens, watching funny pixie
videos when they are supposed to be
working.
I wasn’t sure I’d interpreted his signs correctly – pixie videos? – but Alfheim sounded
depressingly like Midgard.

359/1044

‘So you don’t know any more about magic
than I do,’ I said.
I don’t know what it looked like in the old
days. But I am trying to learn. I have given
up everything to try.
‘What do you mean?’
He glanced around the corner again.
Gómez is gone. Come on.
I wasn’t sure if he’d missed my question or
he’d just chosen to ignore it.
The funeral home was near Washington
and Charles, tucked in a row of Bay Village
town houses that seemed lost among the
newer concrete and glass skyscrapers. A sign
on the awning read: TWINING & SONS MEMORIAL
SERVICES.
A display by the door listed upcoming
viewings. The top one read: MAGNUS CHASE.
The date was today, starting at 10 a.m. The
door was locked. The lights were off.

360/1044

‘Early for my own funeral,’ I said. ‘Typical.’
My hands were shaking. The idea of seeing
my dead self was more unnerving than actually dying. ‘So do we break in?’
I’ll try something, Hearth signed.
From inside his coat, he pulled a leather
pouch. The contents clattered with a familiar
sound.
‘Runestones,’ I guessed. ‘You know how to
use them?’
He shrugged like, We’re about to find out.
He took one stone and tapped it against the
door handle. The lock clicked. The door
swung open.
‘Nice,’ I said. ‘Would that work on any
door?’
Hearth put away the pouch. I couldn’t
quite read his expression – a mixture of sadness and wariness.
I’m learning, he signed. Only tried that
once before, when I met Blitz.

361/1044

‘How did you two –’
Hearth cut me off with a wave. Blitz saved
my life. Long story. You go inside. I will
stand guard here. Dead human bodies … He
shuddered and shook his head.
So much for my elfish backup.
Inside, the funeral home smelled of mouldering bouquets. The threadbare red carpet
and dark wood panelling made the whole
place feel like one giant coffin. I crept down
the hallway and peeked into the first room.
It was set up like a chapel: three stainedglass windows on the back wall, rows of folding chairs facing an open coffin on a dais. I
hated this already. I’d been raised non-religious. I’d always considered myself an
atheist.
So, of course, my punishment was to find
out I was the son of a Norse deity, go to a
Viking afterlife and have an open-coffin memorial in a cheesy uni-faith chapel. If there

362/1044

was an Almighty God up there, a head
honcho of the universe, He was totally laughing at me right now.
At the entrance of the room was a postersize portrait of me, wreathed in black crêpe
paper. They’d chosen the same goofy fifthgrade picture from my elementary-school
yearbook. Next to it, on a small table, was a
guest book.
I was tempted to pick up the pen and write
the first entry:
Thanks for coming to my funeral! –
Magnus.
Who would be here, anyway? Uncle Randolph? Maybe Frederick and Annabeth, if
they were still in town. My old classmates
from two years ago? Yeah, right. If the funeral home offered snacks, some of my homeless buddies might show up, but the only
ones I really cared about were Blitzen and
Hearthstone.

363/1044

I realized I was procrastinating. I wasn’t
sure how long I’d been standing in the chapel
doorway. I forced myself down the aisle.
When I saw my own face in the coffin, I
nearly threw up.
Not because I’m that ugly, but because …
well, you know how weird it is to hear your
own voice on a recording? And how irritating
it can be to see yourself in a photo if you
don’t think you look good? Okay, imagine
seeing your actual body lying right in front of
you. It was so real, and yet so not me.
My hair was shellacked to the sides of my
head. My face was caked with make-up,
probably to cover cuts and bruises. My
mouth was fixed in a weird little smile that I
never would’ve made in real life. I was
dressed in a cheap-looking blue suit with a
blue tie. I hated blue. My hands were clasped
over my stomach, hiding the place where I’d
been impaled by a molten piece of asphalt.

364/1044

‘No, no, no.’ I gripped the sides of the
coffin.
The wrongness of it made me feel like my
guts were burning all over again.
I’d always had an image of what would
happen to my body after death. This wasn’t
it. My mom and I had a pact – which sounds
creepy, but it really wasn’t. She made me
promise that when she died I’d have her
cremated. I’d scatter her ashes in the woods
of the Blue Hills. If I died first, she promised
she would do the same for me. Neither of us
liked the idea of being embalmed, turned into some chemically stabilized exhibition,
then buried in a box. We wanted to be in the
sunshine and the fresh air and just kind of
dissolve.
I hadn’t been able to keep my promise to
my mother. Now I was getting exactly the
kind of funeral I didn’t want.
My eyes watered. ‘I’m sorry, Mom.’

365/1044

I wanted to push over the coffin. I wanted
to torch this place. But I had a job to do. The
sword.
If it was in the coffin, it wasn’t in plain
sight. I held my breath and slipped my hand
along the inside lining like I was searching
for loose change. Nothing.
Thinking the sword might be hidden by a
glamour, I stretched my arm over the coffin,
trying to sense the blade’s presence like I’d
done on the Longfellow Bridge. No heat. No
humming.
The only other option was to check under
the body.
I looked down at Magnus 1.0. ‘Sorry, man.’
I tried to tell myself the corpse was an inanimate object like a scarecrow. Not a real
person. Certainly not me.
I rolled him to one side. He was heavier
than I would’ve thought.

366/1044

Nothing underneath but safety pins holding the coat in place. A label on the white lining read: 50% SATIN, 50% POLYESTER, PRODUCT OF
TAIWAN.
I lowered the body back into place. Dead
Magnus’s hair was all messed up now. The
left side bloomed like a bird-of-paradise
flower. My hands had come unclasped so I
appeared to be giving everybody the finger.
‘Much better,’ I decided. ‘At least that
looks like me.’
Behind me, a broken voice said, ‘Magnus?’
I almost jumped out of my Wiggles shirt.
Standing in the doorway was my cousin
Annabeth.

TWENTY-SIX

Hey, I Know You’re Dead,
But Call Me Maybe

Even if I hadn’t seen her in the park two days
before, I would’ve recognized her up close.
Her wavy blonde hair hadn’t changed since
childhood. Her grey eyes had the same determined look – like she’d chosen a target in
the distance and was going to march over
and destroy it. She was better dressed than
me – orange North Face ski jacket, black
jeans, lace-up winter boots – but if people
saw us together they would’ve mistaken us
for brother and sister.

369/1044

She stared at me, then at the coffin. Slowly
her expression changed from shock to cold
calculation.
‘I knew it,’ she said. ‘I knew you weren’t
dead.’
She tackled me in a hug. As I may have
mentioned, I’m not a big fan of physical contact, but after all I’d been through a hug from
Annabeth was enough to make me crumble.
‘Yeah … um …’ My voice turned ragged. I
extracted myself as gently as I could and
blinked tears out of my eyes. ‘It’s really good
to see you.’
She wrinkled her nose at the corpse. ‘Are
you going to make me ask? I thought you
were dead, you butt.’
I couldn’t help smiling. It had been ten
years since she’d called me a butt. We were
overdue. ‘Hard to explain.’
‘I guessed that much. The body is fake?
You’re trying to convince everyone you died?’

370/1044

‘Uh … not exactly. It’s best if people think
I’m dead, though. Because …’ Because I am
dead, I thought. Because I went to Valhalla,
and now I’m back with a dwarf and an elf!
How could I say that?
I glanced at the chapel doorway. ‘Wait …
Did you pass an el– a guy on the way in? My
friend was supposed to be keeping watch.’
‘No. Nobody was out there. The front door
was unlocked.’
My equilibrium tilted. ‘I should check –’
‘Whoa. Not until I get some answers.’
‘I … Honestly, I don’t know where to start.
I’m in kind of a dangerous situation. I don’t
want to get you involved.’
‘Too late.’ She crossed her arms. ‘And I
know a lot about dangerous situations.’
Somehow, I believed her. Here I was, a reborn superwarrior from Valhalla, and Annabeth still intimidated me. The way she held
herself, her steely confidence – I could tell

371/1044

she’d overcome some hard stuff, the same
way I could tell which guys in the shelters
were the most dangerous. I couldn’t just
blow her off. But I also didn’t want to drag
her into my mess.
‘Randolph almost got killed on that
bridge,’ I said. ‘I don’t want anything to happen to you.’
She laughed without humour. ‘Randolph –
I swear, I’m going to shove that cane of his …
Never mind. He wouldn’t explain why he
took you to the bridge. He kept talking about
how you were in danger because of your
birthday. He said he was trying to help. Something about our family history –’
‘He told me about my father.’
Annabeth’s eyes darkened. ‘You never
knew your dad.’
‘Yeah. But apparently …’ I shook my head.
‘Look, it would sound crazy. Just … there’s a
connection between what happened on the

372/1044

bridge and what happened to my mom two
years ago, and – and who my father is.’
Annabeth’s expression transformed. She
looked as if she’d opened a window expecting
to see a swimming pool and instead found
the Pacific Ocean.
‘Magnus … oh, gods.’
Gods, I noted. Plural.
She paced in front of my coffin, her hands
tented like she was praying. ‘I should’ve
known. Randolph kept rambling about how
our family was special, how we attracted attention. But I had no idea you –’ She froze,
then grabbed my shoulders. ‘I’m so sorry I
didn’t know sooner. I could’ve helped you.’
‘Um, I’m not sure –’
‘My dad’s flying back to California tonight
after the funeral,’ she continued. ‘I was going
to catch the train for New York, but school
can wait. I get it now. I can help you. I know
a place where you’ll be safe.’

373/1044

I pulled away.
I wasn’t sure what Annabeth knew, or
what she thought she knew. Maybe she’d got
mixed up with the Nine Worlds somehow.
Maybe she was talking about something
totally different. But every nerve in my body
tingled with warning when I thought about
telling her the truth.
I appreciated her offer of help. I could tell
it was genuine. Still … those words: I know a
place where you’ll be safe. Nothing activated
the flight instincts of a homeless kid faster
than hearing that.
I was trying to figure out how to explain
that when Hearthstone stumbled through
the chapel doorway. His left eye was swollen
shut. He gesticulated so frantically I could
barely read the signs: HURRY. DANGER.
Annabeth turned, following my gaze. ‘Who
–’

374/1044

‘That’s my friend,’ I said. ‘I really have to
go. Listen, Annabeth …’ I took her hands. ‘I
have to do this by myself. It’s like … like a
personal –’
‘Quest?’
‘I was going to say pain in the – yeah,
quest works. If you really want to help me,
please, just pretend you didn’t see me. Later,
after I’m done, I’ll find you. I’ll explain
everything, I promise. Right now, I have to
go.’
She took a shaky breath. ‘Magnus, I probably could help. But …’ She reached into her
coat pocket and pulled out a folded piece of
paper. ‘Recently I learned the hard way that
sometimes I have to step back and let other
people do their own quests, even people I
care about. At least take this.’
I unfolded the paper. It was one of the
MISSING flyers she and Uncle Frederick had
been handing out.

375/1044

‘The second number is my phone. Call me.
Let me know when you’re okay, or if you
change your mind and –’
‘I’ll call.’ I kissed her cheek. ‘You’re the
best.’
She sighed. ‘You’re still a butt.’
‘I know. Thanks. Bye.’
I ran to Hearthstone, who was bouncing
up and down with impatience. ‘What
happened?’ I demanded. ‘Where were you?’
He was already running. I followed him
out of the funeral home, north on Arlington.
Even pouring on the speed with my upgraded einherji legs, I could barely keep up.
Elves, I discovered, could run fast when they
wanted to.
We reached the stairs to the T stop just as
Blitzen was coming up. I recognized the
wide-brimmed hat and coat from the Longfellow Bridge. He’d added larger sunglasses,
a ski mask, leather gloves and a scarf. In one

376/1044

hand he carried a black canvas bag. I guessed
he was going for that Invisible-Man-GoesBowling look.
‘Whoa, whoa, whoa!’ Blitz grabbed Hearth
to keep him from tumbling into traffic. ‘What
happened to your eye? Did you guys find the
sword?’
‘No sword,’ I gasped. ‘Hearth’s eye – I
don’t know – something about danger.’
Hearth clapped for our attention.
Knocked out, he signed. Girl jumped from
second storey of funeral home. Landed on
me. I woke up in alley.
‘A girl in the funeral home?’ I scowled.
‘You don’t mean Annabeth? She’s my
cousin.’
He shook his head. Not her. Other girl.
She was – His hands froze when he noticed
Blitz’s bag.

377/1044

Hearth stepped back, shaking his head in
disbelief. You brought him? He spelled it out
– H-I-M – so I knew I hadn’t misunderstood.
Blitz hefted the bag. His face was impossible to read, swaddled in anti-sunlight
protection, but his voice was heavy. ‘Yeah.
Capo’s orders. First things first. Magnus,
your cousin was at the funeral home?’
‘It’s okay.’ I resisted the urge to ask why
there was a him in the bowling bag. ‘Annabeth won’t say anything.’
‘But … another girl was there?’
‘I didn’t see her. I guess she heard me
coming in and went upstairs.’
The dwarf turned to Hearth. ‘At which
point, she jumped from the second-floor
window, knocked you out and got away?’
Hearth nodded. She had to be looking for
the sword.
‘You think she found it?’ Blitz asked.
Hearth shook his head.

378/1044

‘How can you be sure?’ I asked.
Because she’s right there.
Hearth pointed across Boylston. A quarter
of a mile down Arlington Street, walking at a
fast clip, was a girl in a brown peacoat and a
green headscarf. I recognized that scarf.
Hearth’s swollen eye had been compliments of Samirah al-Abbas, my ex-Valkyrie.

TWENTY-SEVEN

Let’s Play Frisbee with
Bladed Weapons!

At the north end of the park, Sam crossed
Beacon Street, heading for the footbridge
over Storrow Drive.
‘Where’s she going?’ I asked.
‘The river, obviously,’ Blitz said. ‘She
checked out your body at the funeral home –’
‘Can we please not phrase it that way?’
‘She didn’t find the sword. Now she’s
checking the river.’
Sam climbed the spiral ramp of the footbridge. She glanced back in our direction and

381/1044

we had to hide behind a pile of dirty snow.
During the summer tourist season, it
would’ve been easier to follow her without
attracting attention. Now, the sidewalks were
mostly empty.
Blitzen adjusted his dark glasses. ‘I don’t
like it. Best case scenario, the Valkyries sent
her, but –’
‘No,’ I said. ‘She was kicked out of the
Valkyries.’
I told them the story as we crouched behind our snow-bank.
Hearth looked aghast. His swollen eye had
turned the colour of Kermit the Frog.
Daughter of Loki? he signed. She’s working
for her dad.
‘I don’t know,’ I said. ‘I can’t quite believe
that.’
Because she saved you?
I wasn’t sure. Maybe I didn’t want to believe she was playing for Team Evil. Maybe

382/1044

Loki’s words had wormed their way into my
head: I’m definitely on your side!
I pointed at Hearth’s eye and signed P for
Permission? I touched his eyelid. A spark of
warmth passed through my fingertip. The
bruising faded.
Blitz chuckled. ‘You’re getting good at that,
Magnus.’
Hearthstone grabbed my hand. He studied
my fingertips as if looking for residual magic.
‘Whatever.’ I pulled my hand away, a little
embarrassed. The last thing I wanted to be
was Magnus Chase, Viking Paramedic.
‘We’re losing Sam. Let’s go.’
Sam headed downstream on the Esplanade jogging trail. We crossed the footbridge. Beneath us, cars edged along, bumper to bumper, honking incessantly. Judging
from all the construction vehicles and flashing lights on the Longfellow Bridge, the

383/1044

traffic was probably my fault. My battle with
Surt had completely closed the span.
We lost sight of Sam as we took the spiral
ramp to the Esplanade. We walked past the
playground. I figured we would spot her
somewhere down the path, but she had
disappeared.
‘Well, that’s just great,’ I said.
Blitz limped into the shadow of the closed
concession stand. He looked like he was having trouble carrying his bowling bag.
‘You okay?’ I asked.
‘Legs are just slightly petrified. Nothing to
worry about.’
‘That sounds like something to worry
about.’
Hearth paced. Wish I had a bow. I could
have shot her.
Blitzen shook his head. ‘Stick to magic, my
friend.’

384/1044

Hearth’s gestures were sharp with irritation. Can’t read your lips. The beard is bad
enough. The ski mask – impossible.
Blitz set down the bowling bag, then
signed while he spoke. ‘Hearth is very good
with runes. He knows more rune magic than
any living mortal.’
‘Mortal like human?’ I asked.
Blitz snorted. ‘Kid, humans aren’t the only
mortal species. I meant humans, dwarves or
elves. You can’t count giants – they’re weird.
Or the gods, obviously. Or the soothsayers
who live in Valhalla. I never understood
what they were. But, among the three mortal
species, Hearthstone is the best magician!
Well, he’s also the only magician, as far as I
know. He’s the first person in centuries to
dedicate his life to magic.’
I’m blushing, Hearthstone signed, clearly
not blushing.

385/1044

‘My point is, you’ve got real talent,’ Blitz
told him. ‘But still you want to be an archer!’
Elves were great archers! Hearth
protested.
‘A thousand years ago!’ Blitzen chopped
his hand twice between his opposite thumb
and forefinger, the sign for annoyed. ‘Hearth
is a romantic. He longs for the old days. He’s
the sort of elf who goes to Renaissance
festivals.’
Hearth grunted. I went one time.
‘Guys,’ I said, ‘we have to find Sam.’
No point, Hearth signed. She’ll search the
river. Let her waste her time. We already
looked.
‘What if we missed the sword?’ Blitz asked.
‘What if she’s got another way to find it?’
‘It’s not in the river,’ I said.
Blitz and Hearth both stared at me.
‘You sure about that?’ Blitz asked.

386/1044

‘I … Yeah. Don’t ask me how, but now that
I’m closer to the water …’ I stared out over
the Charles, its rippling grey lines etched
with ice. ‘I feel the same as when I stood over
my coffin. There’s a kind of hollowness – like
when you rattle a can and you can tell there’s
nothing inside. I just know – the sword isn’t
anywhere close.’
‘Rattling a can …’ Blitzen mused. ‘Okay. I
don’t suppose you could direct us towards
the cans we should be rattling?’
‘That would be good,’ said Samirah alAbbas.
She charged from behind the concession
building and kicked me in the chest, propelling me backwards into a tree. My lungs
imploded like paper sacks. By the time I
could see straight again, Blitzen was slumped
against the wall. Hearth’s bag of runestones
had scattered across the ground, and Sam
was swinging her axe at him.

387/1044

‘Stop it!’ I meant to yell, but it came out as
more of a wheeze.
Hearth dodged the axe and tried to tackle
her. Sam judo-flipped him over her knee.
Hearth landed flat on his back.
Blitzen tried to get up. His hat was tilted
sideways. His glasses had been knocked off,
and the skin around his eyes was turning
grey in the daylight.
Sam turned to axe-smack him. Anger
roared through me. I reached for the chain
on my belt. Instantly, it was a sword again. I
pulled the blade and sent it spinning like a
Frisbee. It clanged against Sam’s axe, knocking the weapon from her hand, almost taking
off her face in the process.
She stared at me in disbelief. ‘What the
Helheim?’
‘You started it!’
Hearth grabbed her ankle. Sam kicked him
away.

388/1044

‘And stop kicking my elf!’ I said.
Sam pushed back her headscarf, letting
her dark hair sweep her shoulders. She
crouched in a wrestler’s stance, ready to take
us all on. ‘So help me, Magnus, if I had my
full powers, I would rip your soul from your
body for all the trouble you’ve caused me.’
‘That’s nice,’ I said. ‘Or you could tell us
what you’re doing here. Maybe we could help
each other.’
Blitzen snatched up his sunglasses. ‘Help
her? Why would we help her? She knocked
out Hearth at the funeral home! My eyes feel
like chunks of quartz!’
‘Well, maybe if you hadn’t been stalking
me,’ Sam said.
‘Bah!’ Blitzen readjusted his hat. ‘Nobody
was stalking you, Valkyrie! We’re looking for
the same thing – the sword!’
Still lying on the ground, Hearth signed,
Somebody please kill her.

389/1044

‘What’s he doing?’ Sam demanded. ‘Is he
making rude elf gestures at me?’
‘It’s ASL,’ I said. ‘American Sign
Language.’
‘Alf Sign Language,’ Blitz corrected.
‘Anyway –’ I raised my palms – ‘can we
call a truce and talk? We can always go back
to killing each other later.’
Sam paced, muttering under her breath.
She retrieved her axe and my sword.
Nice job, Magnus, I told myself. Now she
has all the weapons.
She tossed the sword back to me. ‘I should
never have chosen you for Valhalla.’
Blitzen snorted. ‘On that, at least, we
agree. If you hadn’t interfered on the bridge
–’
‘Interfered?’ Sam demanded. ‘Magnus was
already dead when I chose him! You and the
elf weren’t doing him any good with your
plastic sign and your squeaky arrows!’

390/1044

Blitz stood straight, which didn’t make
him much taller. ‘I’ll have you know my
friend is a great rune caster.’
‘Really?’ Samirah asked. ‘I didn’t see him
using magic on the bridge against Surt.’
Hearthstone looked offended. Would
have. Got sidetracked.
‘Exactly,’ Blitz said. ‘And, as for me, I have
many skills, Valkyrie.’
‘For instance?’
‘For instance, I could fix your disgraceful
outfit. No one wears a brown peacoat with a
green headscarf.’
‘A dwarf in sunglasses and a ski mask is
giving me fashion advice.’
‘I have daylight issues!’
‘Guys,’ I said, ‘stop, please. Thank you.’
I helped Hearthstone to his feet. He
scowled at Sam and began collecting his
runestones.

391/1044

‘Okay,’ I said. ‘Sam, why are you looking
for the sword?’
‘Because it’s my only chance! Because –’
Her voice cracked. All the rage seemed to
ebb out of her. ‘Because I honoured your stupid bravery. I rewarded you with Valhalla.
And it cost me everything. If I can find the
sword, maybe the thanes will reinstate me. I
can convince them that … that I’m not –’
‘The daughter of Loki?’ Blitzen asked, but
his voice had lost some of its edge.
Sam lowered her axe. ‘I can’t do anything
about that. But I’m not working for my father. I’m loyal to Odin.’
Hearthstone glanced at me sceptically,
like, Are you buying this?
‘I trust her,’ I said.
Blitz grunted. ‘Is this another rattle-thecan instinct?’

392/1044

‘Maybe,’ I said. ‘Look, we all want to find
this sword, right? We want to keep it away
from Surt.’
‘Assuming Surt doesn’t already have it,’
Sam said. ‘Assuming we can figure out
what’s going on. Assuming the Norns’ prophecy for you isn’t as bad as it sounds –’
‘One way to find out.’ Blitz held up the
bowling-ball bag.
Sam stepped away. ‘What’s in there?’
Hearth made a claw and tapped it twice on
his shoulder – the sign for boss.
‘Answers,’ Blitz said, ‘whether we want
them or not. Let’s confer with the Capo.’

TWENTY-EIGHT

Talk to the Face, ’Cause
That’s Pretty Much All
He’s Got

Blitz led us down the Esplanade, where a
pier extended into an icy lagoon. At the base
of the dock, a candy-striped pole listed
sideways.
‘This is where they do gondola rides in the
summer,’ I said. ‘I don’t think you’re going to
find one now.’
‘We just need water.’ Blitz sat on the dock
and unzipped the bowling bag.

395/1044

‘Oh, gods.’ Sam peered inside. ‘Is that human hair?’
‘Hair, yes,’ Blitz said. ‘Human, no.’
‘You mean …’ She pressed her hand to her
stomach. ‘You’re not serious. You work for
him? You brought him here?’
‘He insisted.’ Blitz pushed down the sides
of the bag, revealing … yep, a severed head.
The most messed-up thing about that? After
two days in Valhalla, I wasn’t even surprised.
The beheaded man’s face was shrivelled
like a month-old apple. Tufts of rust-coloured hair clung to his scalp. His closed eyes
were sunken and dark. His bearded jaw protruded bulldog style, revealing a crooked row
of bottom teeth.
Blitz unceremoniously shoved the head in
the water, bag and all.
‘Dude,’ I said, ‘the state river authority
isn’t going to like that.’

396/1044

The head bobbed on the surface of the lagoon. The water around it bubbled and
swirled. The man’s face inflated, his wrinkles
softening, his skin turning pink. He opened
his eyes.
Sam and Hearth both knelt. Sam elbowed
me to take a knee.
‘Lord Mimir,’ Sam said. ‘You honour us.’
The head opened his mouth and spewed
water. More came out of his nostrils, his
ears, his tear ducts. He reminded me of a
catfish dragged from the bottom of a lake.
‘Man, I hate –’ The head coughed more
water. His eyes turned from chalk white to
blue. ‘I hate travelling in that bag.’
Blitzen bowed. ‘Sorry, Capo. It was that or
the fish tank. And the fish tank breaks
easily.’
The head gurgled. He scanned the faces on
the dock until he found me. ‘Son of Frey, I’ve

397/1044

come a long way to speak with you. Hope you
appreciate it.’
‘You’re the mysterious classified boss,’ I
said. ‘Hearth and Blitz have been watching
me for two years … because they got orders
from a severed head?’
‘Show some respect, boyo.’ Mimir’s voice
reminded me of the longshoremen down at
the Union Hall – their lungs half nicotine,
half seawater.
Hearth frowned at me. Told you C-A-P-O.
Capo means head. Why surprised?
‘I am Mimir,’ said the head. ‘Once I was
mighty among the Aesir. Then came the war
with the Vanir. Now I got my own operation.’
His face was so ugly it was hard to tell
whether he was giving me an ugly look.
‘Did Frey cut off your head?’ I asked. ‘Is
that why you’re mad at me?’
Mimir huffed. ‘I’m not mad. You’ll know
when I’m mad.’

398/1044

I wondered what that meant. Maybe he
would gurgle more threateningly.
‘Your dad was part of the reason I lost my
head, though,’ said Mimir. ‘See, as part of the
truce to end the war, the two godly tribes exchanged hostages. Your father, Frey, and his
father, Njord, came to live in Asgard. The
god Honir and I – we were sent to live in
Vanaheim.’
‘I’m guessing that didn’t go well.’
More water spouted from Mimir’s ears.
‘Your father made me look bad! He was this
great general among the Vanir – all golden
and shiny and handsome. He and Njord got
all kinds of respect in Asgard. As for me and
Honir – the Vanir weren’t so impressed.’
‘No kidding.’
‘Well, Honir was never very, how you say,
charismatic. The Vanir would ask his opinions on important business. He’d mumble,
“Yeah, whatever. It’s all good.” Me, I tried to

399/1044

pull my weight. I told the Vanir they should
be getting into casinos.’
‘Casinos.’
‘Yeah, busloads of retirees coming to Vanaheim. Easy money. And the Vanir had all
these dragons. I told them, racetracks. In the
sky. With dragons. They’d make a killing.’
I looked at Blitz and Hearth. They seemed
resigned, like they’d heard this story many
times before.
‘So anyway,’ said Mimir, ‘the Vanir didn’t
like my worthy counsel. They felt cheated in
the hostage swap. As a protest, they cut off
my head and sent it to Odin.’
‘Shocking. When they could’ve had
casinos.’
Sam coughed loudly. ‘Of course, great
Mimir, both Aesir and Vanir honour you
now. Magnus didn’t mean to insult you. He
is not so stupid.’
She glared at me like, You are so stupid.

400/1044

Around Mimir’s head, the water bubbled
faster. It trickled from his pores and
streamed from his eyes. ‘Forget about it, son
of Frey. I don’t hold a grudge. Besides, when
Odin received my severed head, he didn’t
take revenge. See, the All-Father was smart.
He knew the Vanir and Aesir had to unite
against our common enemy, the Triads.’
‘Uh …’ Blitz adjusted his hat. ‘I think you
mean the giants, boss.’
‘Right. Those guys. So Odin carried me to
a hidden cave in Jotunheim where this magical spring feeds the roots of Yggdrasil. He
placed my head in the well. The water
brought me back to life, and I soaked in all
the knowledge of the World Tree. My wisdom increased a thousandfold.’
‘But … you’re still a severed head.’
Mimir made a sideways nod. ‘It’s not so
bad. I operate across the Nine Worlds –
loans, protection, pachinko machines –’

401/1044

‘Pachinko.’
‘Pachinko is huge. Plus I’m always working
to delay Ragnarok. Ragnarok would be bad
for business.’
‘Right.’ I decided to sit down, because it
seemed like this could take a while. Once I
did it, Sam and Hearth followed my example.
Chickens.
‘Also,’ Mimir said, ‘Odin visits me for advice from time to time. I’m his consigliere. I
guard the well of knowledge. Sometimes I let
travellers drink from its waters, though that
kind of intel never comes without a price.’
The word price settled over the dock like a
heavy blanket. Blitzen sat so still I was afraid
he’d turned to stone. Hearthstone studied
the grain of the planks. I began to understand how my friends had got involved with
Mimir. They’d drunk from his waters (gross)
and paid the price by watching me for the

402/1044

past two years. I wondered if what they’d
learned had been worth it.
‘So, Great and Well-connected Mimir,’ I
said, ‘what do you want with me?’
Mimir spat out a minnow. ‘I don’t have to
tell you, boyo. You already know.’
I wanted to disagree, but the longer I
listened to Mimir the more I felt like I was
breathing pure oxygen. I don’t know why.
The Capo wasn’t exactly inspiring. Yet, being
around him, my mind seemed to function
better, weaving together bits and pieces of
weirdness I’d experienced over the last few
days into one strangely cohesive picture.
An illustration from my old children’s
book of Norse myths came back to me – a
tale so terrifying, even in its watered-down
kiddie version, that I had buried it in my
memory for years.
‘The Wolf,’ I said. ‘Surt wants to free Fenris Wolf.’

403/1044

I was hoping somebody would contradict
me. Hearth lowered his head. Sam closed her
eyes like she was praying.
‘Fenris,’ said Blitzen. ‘There’s a name I was
hoping never to hear again.’
Mimir kept crying ice water. His lips
curled in a faint smile. ‘There you go, son of
Frey. Now tell me: what do you know about
Fenris Wolf?’
I buttoned my hunting jacket. The wind off
the river seemed cold even to me. ‘Correct
me if I’m wrong. I’d love to be wrong. Ages
ago, Loki had an affair with a giantess. They
had three monstrous kids.’
‘I was not one of them,’ Sam muttered.
‘I’ve heard all the jokes.’
Hearthstone winced, like he’d been wondering about that.
‘One,’ I said, ‘was a huge snake.’
‘Jormungand,’ Sam said. ‘The World Serpent, which Odin threw into the sea.’

404/1044

‘The second was Hel,’ I continued. ‘She became, like, the goddess of the dishonourable
dead.’
‘And the third,’ Blitzen said, ‘was Fenris
Wolf.’
His tone was bitter, full of pain.
‘Blitz,’ I said, ‘you sound like you know
him.’
‘Every dwarf knows of Fenris. That was the
first time the Aesir came to us for help. Fenris grew so savage he would’ve devoured the
gods. They tried to tie him up, but he broke
every chain.’
‘I remember,’ I said. ‘Finally the dwarves
made a rope strong enough to hold him.’
‘Ever since,’ Blitzen said, ‘the children of
Fenris have been enemies of the dwarves.’
He looked up, his dark shades reflecting my
face. ‘You’re not the only one who’s lost family to wolves, kid.’

405/1044

I had a strange urge to hug him. Suddenly
I didn’t feel so bad about all the time he’d
spent watching me. We were brothers in
something more than homelessness. Still … I
resisted the impulse. Whenever I’m tempted
to hug a dwarf, that’s usually a sign I need to
move along.
‘On Ragnarok,’ I said, ‘the Day of Doom,
one of the first things that’s supposed to happen is Fenris gets freed.’
Sam nodded. ‘The old stories don’t say
how that happens –’
‘But one way,’ Blitz said, ‘would be to cut
him loose. The rope Gleipnir is unbreakable,
but …’
Frey’s sword, Hearth signed, is the
sharpest blade in the Nine Worlds.
‘Surt wants to free the Wolf with my father’s sword.’ I looked at Mimir. ‘How are we
doing so far?’

406/1044

‘Not bad,’ the head burbled. ‘Which brings
us to your task.’
‘Stop Surt,’ I said. ‘Find the sword before
he does … assuming he hasn’t got it already.’
‘He doesn’t,’ Mimir said. ‘Believe me, an
event like that would make the Nine Worlds
tremble. I’d taste fear in the waters of
Yggdrasil.’
‘Yuck,’ I said.
‘You have no idea,’ said Mimir. ‘But you
must hurry.’
‘The Norns’ prophecy. Nine days hence,
blah, blah, blah.’
Water bubbled out of Mimir’s ears. ‘I’m
pretty sure they didn’t say blah, blah, blah.
However, you’re correct. The island where
the gods imprisoned Fenris is only accessible
on the first full moon of each year. That’s
now seven days hence.’
‘Who makes up these rules?’ I asked.

407/1044

‘I made up that rule,’ Mimir said. ‘So shut
up. Find the sword. Reach the island before
Surt does.’
Sam raised her hand. ‘Um, Lord Mimir, I
understand finding the sword. But why take
it to the island? Isn’t that where Surt wants
the sword?’
‘See, Miss al-Abbas … this is why I’m the
boss and you’re not. Yeah, bringing the
sword to the island is dangerous. Yeah, Surt
could use it to free the Wolf. But Surt is
gonna find a way to free Fenris with or
without it. I did mention I can see the future,
right? The only person who might be able to
stop Surt is Magnus Chase – assuming he
can find the sword and learn to wield it
properly.’
I’d shut up for almost a whole minute, so I
figured I could raise my hand. ‘Lord Mister
Bubbles –’
‘Mimir.’

408/1044

‘If this sword is such a big deal, why did
everybody let it sit on the bottom of the
Charles River for a thousand years?’
Mimir sighed foam. ‘My regular minions
never ask so many questions.’
Blitz coughed. ‘Actually, we do, boss. You
just ignore us.’
‘To answer your question, Magnus Chase,
the sword can only be found by a descendant
of Frey upon reaching the age of maturity.
Others have tried, failed and died. Right
now, you’re the only living descendant of
Frey.’
‘The only one … in the world?’
‘In the Nine Worlds. Frey doesn’t get out
much any more. Your mother – she must’ve
been really something to attract his attention. Anyway, a lot of people in the Nine
Worlds – gods, giants, bookies, you name it
– have been waiting for you to turn sixteen.

409/1044

Some wanted you killed so you couldn’t find
the sword. Some wanted you to succeed.’
Hot pins pressed against the base of my
neck. The idea of a bunch of gods peering
through their Asgardian telescopes, watching
me grow up, creeped me out. My mom must
have known all along. She’d done her best to
keep me safe, to teach me survival skills. The
night the wolves attacked our apartment,
she’d given her life to save me.
I met the Capo’s watery eyes. ‘And you?’ I
asked. ‘What do you want?’
‘You’re a risky bet, Magnus. A lot of possible fates intersect in your life. You could
deal the forces of evil a great setback and
delay Ragnarok for generations. Or, if you
fail, you could hasten the Day of Doom.’
I tried to swallow. ‘Hasten it, like, by how
much?’
‘How does next week work for you?’
‘Oh.’

410/1044

‘I decided to take the bet,’ Mimir said.
‘After the children of Fenris killed your
mother, I sent Blitz and Hearth to guard you.
You probably don’t realize how many times
they’ve saved your life.’
Hearth held up seven fingers.
I shuddered, but mostly from the mention
of Fenris’s two children, the wolves with blue
eyes …
‘To succeed,’ said Mimir, ‘you’re gonna
need this team. Hearthstone here – he’s dedicated his life to rune magic. Without him,
you’ll fail. You’ll also need an able dwarf like
Blitzen who understands dwarven crafting.
You might need to strengthen the Wolf’s
bindings, or even replace them.’
Blitz shifted. ‘Uh, boss … my crafting skills
are, well, you know –’
‘Don’t give me that,’ said Mimir. ‘No dwarf
has a stouter heart. No dwarf has travelled
further in the Nine Worlds or has more of a

411/1044

desire to keep Fenris chained. Also, you’re in
my service. You’ll do what I say.’
‘Ah.’ Blitzen nodded. ‘When you put it that
way …’
‘What about me, Lord Mimir?’ asked Sam.
‘What’s my part in your plan?’
Mimir frowned. Around his beard, the water bubbled a darker shade of green. ‘You
weren’t part of the plan at all. There’s a cloud
around your fate, Miss al-Abbas. Taking
Magnus to Valhalla – I didn’t see that coming. It wasn’t supposed to happen.’
Sam looked away, her lips pressed tight
with anger.
‘Sam’s got a part to play,’ I said. ‘I’m sure
of it.’
‘Do not patronize me, Magnus. I chose you
because –’ She stopped herself. ‘It was supposed to happen.’
I remembered what she’d said in the feast
hall: I was told … I was promised. By

412/1044

whom? I decided not to ask that in front of
the Capo.
Mimir studied her. ‘I hope you’re right,
Miss al-Abbas. When Magnus first took the
sword from the river, he couldn’t control it
very well. Maybe now that he’s an einherji,
he’ll have the strength, in which case you’ve
saved the day. Or maybe you’ve completely
messed up his destiny.’
‘We’re going to succeed,’ I insisted. ‘Just
two questions: where is the sword, and
where is the island?’
Mimir nodded, which made him look like
an oversize fishing bobber. ‘Well, that’s the
trick, isn’t it? To find that kinda information,
I’d have to tear the veils between the worlds,
grease a lot of palms, see into the realms of
the other gods.’
‘Couldn’t we just drink your magic wellwater?’

413/1044

‘You could,’ he agreed. ‘But it would cost
you. Are you and Samirah al-Abbas ready to
be bound to my service?’
Hearth’s face froze in apprehension. From
the tension in Blitz’s shoulders, I guessed he
was trying very hard not to leap to his feet
and scream, Don’t do it!
‘You couldn’t make an exception?’ I asked
the Capo. ‘Seeing as how you want this job
done?’
‘No can do, boyo. I’m not being greedy. It’s
just, well, you get what you pay for. Something comes cheap, it ain’t worth much.
That’s true for knowledge especially. You can
pay for a shortcut, get the information right
now, or you’ll have to find it on your own,
the hard way.’
Sam crossed her arms. ‘Apologies, Lord
Mimir. I may have been kicked out of the
Valkyries, but I still consider myself bound
to Odin’s service. I can’t take on another

414/1044

master. Magnus can make his own choice,
but –’
‘We’ll figure it out on our own,’ I agreed.
Mimir made a low sloshing sound. He
looked almost impressed. ‘Interesting choice.
Good luck, then. If you succeed, you’ll have a
house account at all my pachinko parlours. If
you fail … I’ll see you next week for
Doomsday.’
The god’s head swirled and disappeared
into the icy water of the lagoon.
‘He flushed himself,’ I said.
Hearth looked even paler than usual.
What now?
My stomach rumbled. I hadn’t eaten anything since last night, and apparently my system had been spoiled after a couple of allyou-can-eat Viking buffets.
‘Now,’ I said, ‘I’m thinking lunch.’

TWENTY-NINE

We Are Falafel-Jacked by
an Eagle

We didn’t talk much as we headed back
through the park. The air smelled of incoming snow. The wind picked up and howled
like wolves, or maybe I just had wolves on
the brain.
Blitz limped along, zigzagging from shadow to shadow as best he could. Hearth’s
brightly striped scarf didn’t match his grim
expression. I wanted to ask him more about
rune magic now that I knew he was the best
(and only) mortal practitioner. Maybe there

417/1044

was a rune that could make wolves explode,
preferably from a safe distance. But Hearth
kept his hands shoved in his pockets – the
sign language equivalent of I don’t want to
talk.
We were passing my old sleeping spot under the footbridge when Sam grumbled,
‘Mimir. I should’ve known he was involved.’
I glanced over. ‘A few minutes ago, you
were all, Lord Mimir, you honour us; we’re
not worthy.’
‘Of course I showed respect when he was
right in front of me! He’s one of the oldest
gods. But he’s unpredictable. It’s never been
clear whose side he’s on.’
Blitzen jumped to the shade of a willow
tree, alarming several ducks. ‘The Capo is on
the side of everybody in the world who
doesn’t want to die. Isn’t that enough?’

418/1044

Sam laughed. ‘I suppose you two work for
him of your own free will? You didn’t drink
from his well and pay the price?’
Neither Blitz nor Hearth responded.
‘That’s what I thought,’ Sam said. ‘I’m not
part of Mimir’s plan because I would never
blindly go along with it and drink his magical
knowledge Kool-Aid.’
‘It doesn’t taste like Kool-Aid,’ Blitz objected. ‘It’s more like root beer with a hint of
clove.’
Sam turned to me. ‘I’m telling you, this
doesn’t add up. Finding the Sword of Summer – I get that. But taking it to the very
place where Surt wants to use it? Unwise.’
‘Yeah, but if I have the sword –’
‘Magnus, the sword is destined to fall into
Surt’s hands sooner or later. At Ragnarok,
your father will die because he gave his
sword away. Surt will kill him with it. That’s
what most of the stories say, anyway.’

419/1044

I got claustrophobic just thinking about it.
How could anybody, even a god, avoid going
crazy if he knew centuries in advance exactly
how he was going to die?
‘Why does Surt hate Frey so much?’ I
asked. ‘Couldn’t he pick on a big strong war
god?’
Blitzen frowned. ‘Kid, Surt wants death
and destruction. He wants fire to run
rampant across the Nine Worlds. A war god
can’t stop that. Frey can. He’s the god of the
growing season – the god of health and new
life. He keeps the extremes in check, both
fire and ice. There’s nothing Surt hates worse
than being restrained. Frey is his natural
enemy.’
And by extension, I thought, Surt hates
me.
‘If Frey knew what his fate would be,’ I
said, ‘why did he give up his blade in the first
place?’

420/1044

Blitz grunted. ‘Love. Why else?’
‘Love?’
‘Ugh,’ Sam said. ‘I hate that story. Where
are you taking us for lunch, Magnus?’
Part of me wanted to hear the story. Part
of me remembered my conversation with
Loki: Will you search for your heart’s desire,
knowing it may doom you as it doomed
your father?
A lot of Norse stories seemed to have the
same message: knowing things wasn’t always
worth the price. Unfortunately for me, I’d always been the curious type.
‘It’s … uh, just up ahead,’ I said. ‘Come on.’
The food court at the Transportation
Building wasn’t Valhalla, but if you were
homeless in Boston it was pretty close. The
indoor atrium was warm, open to the public
and never crowded. It was only halfheartedly patrolled by private security. As
long as you had a drink or a plate of half-

421/1044

eaten food, you could sit at the tables for a
long time before anybody made you move.
On the way in, Blitzen and Hearthstone
started towards the garbage cans to check for
lunch leavings, but I stopped them.
‘Guys, no,’ I said. ‘We’re eating actual
meals today. My treat.’
Hearth raised an eyebrow. He signed, You
have money?
‘He’s got that friend here,’ Blitzen recalled.
‘The falafel guy.’
Sam froze in her tracks. ‘What?’
She looked around as if just realizing
where we were.
‘It’s cool,’ I promised. ‘I know a guy at Fadlan’s Falafel. You’ll thank me for it. Stuff is
amazing –’
‘No – I – oh, gods –’ She hastily put her
scarf over her hair. ‘Maybe I’ll wait outside –
I can’t –’

422/1044

‘Nonsense.’ Blitz hooked his arm through
hers. ‘They might serve more food if we’ve
got a pretty woman with us!’
Sam clearly wanted to bolt, but she allowed Hearth and Blitz to steer her into the
food court. I guess I should’ve paid more attention to how uncomfortable she was acting, but once you put me within a hundred
feet of Fadlan’s Falafel I get tunnel vision.
Over the past two years, I’d struck up a
friendship with the manager, Abdel. I think
he saw me as his community-service project.
The shop always had surplus food – slightly
out-of-date pitta bread, day-old shawarma,
kibbeh that had been sitting under the heat
lamps a little too long. Abdel couldn’t legally
sell the stuff, but it still tasted perfectly fine.
Instead of throwing it out, Abdel gave it to
me. Whenever I came around, I could count
on a falafel flatbread sandwich or something
just as tasty. In return, I made sure the other

423/1044

homeless folks in the atrium stayed polite
and cleaned up after themselves so Abdel’s
paying customers weren’t scared away.
In Boston, you couldn’t walk a block
without stumbling into some icon of liberty –
the Freedom Trail, the Old North Church,
the Bunker Hill Monument, whatever – but,
to me, liberty tasted like Fadlan’s Falafel.
That stuff had kept me alive and independent ever since my mom died.
I didn’t want to overwhelm Abdel with too
many people, so I sent Blitz and Hearth to
grab a table while I escorted Sam to get the
food. The whole way, she dragged her feet,
turning aside, fiddling with her headscarf as
if she wanted to disappear inside it.
‘What’s the matter with you?’ I asked.
‘Maybe he’s not there,’ she muttered.
‘Maybe you can say I’m your tutor.’
I didn’t know what she was talking about. I
bellied up to the counter while Sam hung

424/1044

back, doing her best to hide behind a potted
ficus tree.
‘Is Abdel here?’ I asked the guy at the
register.
He started to say something, but then Abdel’s son Amir came out from the back, grinning and wiping his hands on his apron.
‘Jimmy, how’s it going?’
I relaxed. If Abdel wasn’t around, Amir
was the next best thing. He was eighteen or
nineteen, trim and good-looking, with slick
dark hair, an Arabic tattoo on his biceps, and
a smile so brilliant it could’ve sold truckloads
of teeth whitener. Like everybody at Fadlan’s
Falafel, he knew me as ‘Jimmy’.
‘Yeah, I’m good,’ I said. ‘How’s your pop?’
‘He’s at the Somerville location today. Can
I get you some food?’
‘Man, you’re the best.’

425/1044

Amir laughed. ‘No biggie.’ He glanced over
my shoulder and did a double take. ‘And
there’s Samirah! What are you doing here?’
She shuffled forward. ‘Hi, Amir. I am … tutoring Ma– Jimmy. I am tutoring Jimmy.’
‘Oh, yeah?’ Amir leaned on the counter,
which made his arm muscles flex. The dude
worked full-time at his dad’s various shops,
yet he somehow managed to avoid getting
even a speck of grease on his white T-shirt.
‘Don’t you have school?’
‘Um, yes, but I get credit for tutoring off
campus. Jimmy and … his classmates.’ She
pointed towards Blitz and Hearth, who were
having a rapid-fire argument in sign language, tracing circles in the air. ‘Geometry,’
Samirah said. ‘They’re hopeless with
geometry.’
‘Hopeless,’ I agreed. ‘But food helps us
study.’

426/1044

Amir’s eyes crinkled. ‘I’ve got you covered.
Glad to see you’re okay, Jimmy. That bridge
accident the other day – the paper had this
picture of a kid who died? Looked a lot like
you. Different name, but we were worried.’
I’d been so focused on falafel that I’d forgotten to think about them making that connection. ‘Ah, yeah, I saw that. I’m good. Just
studying geometry. With my tutor.’
‘Okay!’ Amir smiled at Sam. The awkwardness was so thick you could’ve cut it with a
broadsword. ‘Well, Samirah, say hi to Jid
and Bibi for me. You guys go ahead and sit.
I’ll bring out some food in a sec.’
Sam muttered something that might have
been Thanks a lot or Kill me now. Then we
joined Blitz and Hearth at the table.
‘What was that about?’ I asked her. ‘How
do you know Amir?’

427/1044

She pulled her scarf a little lower over her
forehead. ‘Don’t sit too close to me. Try to
look like we’re talking about geometry.’
‘Triangles,’ I said. ‘Quadrilaterals. Also,
why are you embarrassed? Amir is awesome.
If you know the Fadlan family, you’re like a
rock star to me.’
‘He’s my cousin,’ she blurted. ‘Second
cousin, twice removed. Or something.’
I looked at Hearth. He was scowling at the
floor. Blitz had taken off his ski mask and
glasses, I guess because the interior light
didn’t bother him as much, and was now sullenly spinning a plastic fork on the table. Apparently I’d missed a good argument
between him and Hearth.
‘Okay,’ I said. ‘But why so nervous?’
‘Can you drop it?’ she said.
I raised my hands. ‘Fine. Let’s all start
over. Hi, everybody. I’m Magnus, and I’m an
einherji. If we’re not going to study

428/1044

geometry, could we talk about how we’re going to find the Sword of Summer?’
Nobody answered.
A pigeon waddled past, pecking at crumbs.
I glanced back at the falafel shop. For
some reason, Amir had rolled down the steel
curtain. I’d never seen him close the shop
during lunch hour. I wondered if Sam had
somehow offended him and he’d cut off my
falafel allowance.
If so, I was going to go berserker.
‘What happened to our food?’ I wondered.
At my feet, a small voice croaked, ‘I can
help with both those questions.’
I looked down. My week had been so wack
I didn’t even flinch when I realized who had
spoken.
‘Guys,’ I said, ‘this pigeon wants to help.’
The pigeon fluttered onto our table.
Hearth nearly fell out of his chair. Blitz
snatched up a fork.

429/1044

‘Service here can be a little slow,’ said the
pigeon. ‘But I can speed up your order. I can
also tell you where to find the sword.’
Sam reached for her axe. ‘That’s not a
pigeon.’
The bird regarded her with a beady orange
eye. ‘Maybe not. But if you kill me you’ll never get your lunch. You’ll also never find the
sword or see your intended again.’
Samirah’s eyes looked like they were going
to shoot across the atrium.
‘What is he talking about?’ I said. ‘Intended what?’
The bird cooed. ‘If you ever want Fadlan’s
Falafel to open again –’
‘Okay, that’s a declaration of war.’ I considered grabbing for the bird, but even with
my einherji reflexes I doubted I could catch
it. ‘What did you do? What’s happened to
Amir?’

430/1044

‘Nothing yet!’ said the pigeon. ‘I’ll bring
you your lunch. All I want is first pick of the
food.’
‘Uh-huh,’ I said. ‘And, assuming I believe
you, what would you want in exchange for
information about the sword?’
‘A favour. It’s negotiable. Now, does that
falafel shop stay closed forever, or do we
have a deal?’
Blitzen shook his head. ‘Don’t do it,
Magnus.’
Hearth signed, Pigeons cannot be trusted.
Sam met my eyes. Her expression was
pleading – almost frantic. Either she liked
falafel even more than I did, or she was worried about something else.
‘Fine,’ I said. ‘Bring us our lunch.’
Immediately the shop’s steel curtain rolled
up. The cashier stood like a statue, the phone
to his ear. Then he unfroze, glanced over his
shoulder and shouted an order to the cook as

431/1044

if nothing had happened. The pigeon took off
and sped towards the shop, disappearing behind the counter. The cashier didn’t seem to
notice.
A moment later, a much larger bird shot
out of the kitchen – a bald eagle with a tray
in his claws. He landed in the middle of our
table.
‘You’re an eagle now?’ I asked.
‘Yeah,’ he said in the same croaky voice. ‘I
like to mix it up. Here’s your food.’
It was everything I could’ve asked for:
steaming squares of spiced ground-beef kibbeh; a stack of lamb kebabs with mint yogurt
dip; four fresh slabs of pitta bread filled with
deep-fried nuggets of chickpea goodness,
drizzled in tahini sauce and garnished with
pickle wedges.
‘Oh, Helheim yes.’ I reached for the tray,
but the eagle pecked at my hand.
‘Now, now,’ he chided. ‘I get first pick.’

432/1044

Ever seen an eagle eat falafel?
That horrifying image now haunts my
nightmares.
Faster than I could blink, the eagle struck,
vacuuming up everything but a single wedge
of pickle.
‘Hey!’ I yelled.
Sam rose, hefting her axe. ‘He’s a giant.
He’s got to be!’
‘We had a deal.’ The eagle belched. ‘Now
about the sword –’
I let loose a guttural roar – the cry of a
man who has been deprived of his rightful
kibbeh. I drew my sword and smacked the
eagle with the flat of the blade.
It wasn’t the most rational move, but I was
hungry. I was angry. I hated being taken advantage of, and I didn’t particularly like bald
eagles.
The blade hit the bird’s back and stuck
there like superglue. I tried to pull it away,

433/1044

but it wouldn’t move. My hands were grafted
to the sword grip.
‘Okay, then,’ the eagle squawked, ‘we can
play it that way.’
He took off through the food court at sixty
miles an hour, dragging me along behind
him.

THIRTY

An Apple a Day Will Get
You Killed

Add to my list of Least Favourite Activities:
eagle surfing.
The stupid bird shouldn’t have been able
to take off with a more-or-less-full-grown
Magnus in tow. Yet he did.
Behind me, Blitz and Sam yelled helpful
stuff like ‘Hey! Stop!’ as the eagle dragged
me through tables, chairs and potted plants,
then blasted through the double glass doors
and soared over Charles Street.

436/1044

A guy having lunch in the tenth-floor
condo across the street spewed Cheetos
when I shot past. I left a nice footprint on his
window.
‘Let me go!’ I yelled at the eagle.
The bird cackled as he pulled me along a
rooftop. ‘You sure about that? Heads up!’
I twisted, barely avoiding a face-first encounter with an industrial AC unit. I
ploughed through a brick chimney, using my
chest as a battering ram. Then the eagle
plummeted down the other side of the
building.
‘So!’ the eagle said. ‘You ready to negotiate
that favour?’
‘With a mutant pigeon who steals falafel?’
I yelled. ‘No thanks!’
‘Suit yourself.’ The eagle veered, slamming
me into a fire escape. I felt my ribs crack, like
vials of acid breaking inside my chest. My
empty stomach tried unsuccessfully to hurl.

437/1044

We climbed above one of the churches on
Boylston and circled the steeple. I had an
addled thought about Paul Revere and the
whole One if by land, two if by sea thing.
And if you see a dude being dragged by a
giant eagle, uh, I don’t even know how
many lights that is.
I tried to heal my ribs through willpower,
but I couldn’t concentrate. The pain was too
intense. I kept running into walls and kicking out windows.
‘All I want,’ the eagle said, ‘is a favour for a
favour. I’ll tell you how to get the sword, but
you have to get me something while you’re at
it. Nothing much. Just an apple. One apple.’
‘What’s the catch?’
‘The catch is that if you don’t agree … oh,
look! Pigeon spikes!’
Ahead of us, the edge of a hotel roof
bristled with steel like a miniature line of
World War I barbed wire. The spikes were

438/1044

there to discourage roosting birds, but they’d
also do a great job shredding my soft
underbelly.
Fear got the best of me. I don’t like pointy
objects. My gut was still sensitive from my
recent death by molten asphalt.
‘Fine!’ I yelled. ‘No spikes!’
‘Say: By my troth, I agree to your terms.’
‘I don’t even know what that means!’
‘Say it!’
‘By my troth, I agree to your terms! Yes,
apples! No, spikes!’
The eagle climbed, narrowly clearing the
roof. The tips of my shoes twanged against
the barbs. We circled Copley Square and
landed on the roof of the Boston Public
Library.
The sword came free of the eagle’s back.
My hands unglued themselves, which was
great, except that I now had nothing to hold
on to. The curved red clay tiles were almost

439/1044

impossible to stand on. The roof slanted precariously. Eighty feet below me stretched a
wide expanse of asphalt-flavoured death.
I crouched to avoid falling. Carefully, I
sheathed my sword, which melted back into
a length of chain.
‘Ow,’ I said.
My ribs ached. My arms had been pulled
half out of their sockets. My chest felt like it
had been permanently tattooed with a brickwall design.
To my left, the eagle perched on a
lightning-rod spire, lording over the decorative bronze griffins around the base.
I’d never thought of eagles as having expressions, but this one definitely looked
smug.
‘I’m glad you saw reason!’ he said.
‘Though, honestly, I enjoyed our little flight
through the city. It’s good to speak with you
alone.’

440/1044

‘I’m blushing,’ I grumbled. ‘Oh, no, wait.
That’s the blood all over my face.’
‘Here’s the information you need,’ the
eagle continued. ‘When your sword fell in the
river, the current carried it downstream. It
was claimed by the goddess Ran. Lots of
valuable things end up in her net.’
‘Ran?’
The eagle clicked his beak. ‘Sea goddess.
Has a net. Try to keep up.’
‘Where do I find her? And please don’t say
“the sea”.’
‘She could be anywhere, so you’ll have to
get her attention. The way to do that: I know
this guy, Harald. He’s got a boat at the Fish
Pier, does deep-sea excursions. Tell him Big
Boy sent you.’
‘Big Boy.’
‘One of my many names. Harald will know
what you mean. Convince him to take you
fishing in Massachusetts Bay. If you cause

441/1044

enough of a ruckus out there, you’ll attract
Ran’s attention. Then you can negotiate. Ask
her for the sword and one of Idun’s apples.’
‘Eden.’
‘Are you just going to repeat every name I
give you? It’s I-D-U-N. She distributes the
apples of immortality that keep the gods
young and spry. Ran is sure to have one lying
around, because, seriously, once you see her
you’ll be able to tell she’s not good about remembering to eat her apples. When you have
the apple, bring it back here. Give it to me,
and I’ll release you from your vow.’
‘Two questions. Are you insane?’
‘No.’
‘Second question: how is fishing in the bay
going to create a ruckus that attracts a sea
goddess?’
‘That depends on what you fish for. Tell
Harald you need the special bait. He’ll

442/1044

understand. If he protests, tell him Big Boy
insists.’
‘I have no idea what that means,’ I confessed. ‘Assuming I meet Ran, how am I supposed to bargain with her?’
‘That’s three questions. Also, that’s your
problem.’
‘Last question.’
‘This is four now.’
‘What’s to keep me from getting the sword
and not bringing you an apple?’
‘Well, you swore by your troth,’ said the
eagle. ‘Your troth is your word, your faith,
your honour, your soul. It’s a binding oath,
especially for an einherji. Unless you want to
spontaneously combust and find yourself
trapped forever in the icy darkness of
Helheim …’
I chewed my lip. ‘I guess I’ll keep my
promise.’

443/1044

‘Excellent!’ The eagle flapped his wings.
‘Here come your friends, which is my cue to
leave. I’ll see you when you have my fresh
produce!’
The eagle soared away and disappeared
behind the glass walls of the Hancock Tower,
leaving me to find my own way off the roof.
Down in Copley Square, Blitzen, Hearthstone and Sam were just running onto the
frozen lawn. Sam saw me first. She stopped
in her tracks and pointed.
I waved.
I couldn’t see her expression, but she
spread her arms like, What the heck are you
doing up there?
With some difficulty, I got to my feet.
Thanks to my ValhallaCare health plan, my
injuries were already starting to mend, but I
still felt sore and stiff. I picked my way to the
edge of the roof and peered over. Magnus 1.0
never would’ve considered it, but now I

444/1044

plotted a series of ten-foot jumps – to that
window ledge, that flagpole, the top of that
light fixture, then the front steps – and I
thought, Yeah, no problem.
In a matter of seconds, I’d safely reached
the ground. My friends met me at the
sidewalk.
‘What was that about?’ Blitzen demanded.
‘Was he a giant?’
‘Dunno,’ I said. ‘His name is Big Boy, and
he likes apples.’
I told them the story.
Hearthstone smacked his forehead. He
signed, You swore by your troth?
‘Well, it was either that or get shredded by
pigeon spikes, so yeah.’
Sam stared at the sky, maybe hoping to see
an eagle she could hit with her axe. ‘This will
end badly. Deals with giants always do.’

445/1044

‘At least Magnus found out where the
sword is,’ Blitzen said. ‘Besides, Ran’s a goddess. She’ll be on our side, right?’
Sam snorted. ‘I guess you haven’t heard
the stories about her that I have. But, at this
point, we don’t have much choice. Let’s find
Harald.’

THIRTY-ONE

Go Smelly or Go Home

I’d never been scared of boats until I saw
Harald’s.
Painted on the prow was HARALD’S DEEP-SEA
EXCURSIONS AND DEATH WISHES, which seemed
like a lot of verbiage for a twenty-foot-long
dinghy. The deck was a mess of ropes, buckets and tackle boxes. Nets and buoys festooned the sides like Christmas decorations.
The hull had once been green but had faded
to the colour of well-chewed spearmint gum.
Nearby on the dock sat Harald himself, in
splattered yellow overalls and a T-shirt so
grungy, my donation-box Wiggles shirt

448/1044

would’ve been an upgrade. He was a sumosize guy with arms as thick as the rotating
meat spits back at Fadlan’s Falafel. (Yes, I
was still thinking about food.)
The weirdest thing about him was his hair.
His shaggy locks, his beard, even his fuzzy
forearms glistened whitish blue, as if he’d
been caught outside overnight and glazed
with frost.
As we approached, he looked up from the
rope he was coiling. ‘Well, now. A dwarf, an
elf and two humans walk onto my pier …
Sounds like the beginning of a joke.’
‘I hope not,’ I said. ‘We want to rent your
boat for a fishing expedition. We’ll need the
special bait.’
Harald snorted. ‘You four on one of my expeditions? I don’t think so.’
‘Big Boy sent us.’

449/1044

Harald furrowed his brow, causing light
snow to fall across his cheeks. ‘Big Boy, eh?
What does he want with the likes of you?’
Sam stepped forward. ‘None of your concern.’ From her coat pocket she pulled a
large coin and tossed it to Harald. ‘One red
gold now; five more when we finish. Will you
rent us the boat or not?’
I leaned towards her. ‘What is red gold?’
‘The currency of Asgard and Valhalla,’ she
said. ‘Widely accepted in the other realms.’
Harald sniffed the coin. Its gold surface
glowed so warmly it seemed to be on fire.
‘You have giantish blood, girl? I can see it in
your eyes.’
‘That’s also none of your concern.’
‘Humph. The payment is sufficient, but my
boat is small. Two passengers maximum. I’ll
take you and the human boy, but the dwarf
and the elf – forget it.’

450/1044

Blitzen cracked his knuckles inside his
leather gloves. ‘Look here, Frosty –’
‘HUR! Never call a frost giant Frosty. We
hate that. Besides, you look half petrified
already, dwarf. I don’t need another anchor.
As for elves, they are creatures of air and
light. They’re useless aboard a ship. Two passengers only. That’s the deal. Take it or leave
it.’
I glanced at my friends. ‘Guys, sidebar
please.’
I led them down the dock, out of earshot
from Harald. ‘That dude is a frost giant?’
Hearthstone signed, Icy hair. Ugly. Big.
Yes.
‘But … I mean, he’s large, but he’s not
giant.’
Sam’s expression made me suspect she
was not the most patient geometry tutor.
‘Magnus, giants aren’t necessarily enormous.
Some are. Some can grow to enormous size

451/1044

if they feel like it. But they’re even more varied than humans. Many look like regular
people. Some can change shape into eagles
or pigeons or almost anything.’
‘But what’s a frost giant doing on the docks
in Boston? Can we trust him?’
‘First answer,’ Blitzen said, ‘frost giants are
all over the place, especially in the north of
Midgard. As for trusting him – absolutely
not. He might take you two straight to Jotunheim and throw you in a dungeon, or he
might use you for bait. You have to insist
that Hearth and I go with you.’
Hearth tapped Blitz’s shoulder.
Giant is right, he signed. I told you – too
much daylight. You are turning to stone.
Too stubborn to admit.
‘Nah, I’m fine.’
Hearth looked around the dock. He spotted a metal pail, picked it up and slammed it

452/1044

over Blitz’s head. Blitz didn’t react, but the
pail crumpled into the shape of his skull.
‘Okay,’ Blitz admitted, ‘maybe I’m petrifying a little, but –’
‘Get out of the light for a while,’ I told him.
‘We’ll be fine. Hearth, can you find him a
nice underground lair or something?’
Hearth nodded. We will try to find out
more about Fenris and his chains. Meet you
tonight. Back at library?
‘Sounds good,’ I said. ‘Sam, let’s go
fishing.’
We returned to Harald, who was fashioning his rope into a lovely noose.
‘Okay,’ I told him, ‘two passengers. We
need to fish as far out in Massachusetts Bay
as possible, and we need the special bait.’
Harald gave me a twisted grin. His teeth
might have been cut from the same fuzzy
brown cord he was coiling. ‘By all means,
little human.’ He pointed to a sliding door on

453/1044

the side of the warehouse. ‘Pick your own
bait … if you can carry it.’
When Sam and I opened the door, I almost
passed out from the stench.
Sam gagged. ‘Odin’s Eye, I’ve smelled battlefields that smell better than this.’
Inside the storage room, hanging from
meat hooks, was an impressive collection of
rotting carcasses. The smallest was a fivefoot-long shrimp. The largest was a severed
bull’s head the size of a Fiat.
I covered my nose with my jacket sleeve.
That didn’t help. I felt like somebody had
filled a grenade with rotten egg, rusty metal
and raw onion, then tossed it into my sinus
cavity.
‘It hurts to breathe,’ I said. ‘Which of these
tasty morsels do you think is the special
bait?’
Sam pointed at the bull’s head. ‘Go big or
go home?’

454/1044

‘She said to the homeless kid.’ I forced myself to study the bull’s head – its curved
black horns, its lolling pink tongue like a
hairy air mattress, its white steaming fur and
the glistening slime craters of its nostrils.
‘How is it possible that a bull grew that
large?’
‘It’s probably from Jotunheim,’ Sam said.
‘Their cattle get pretty big.’
‘You don’t say. Any idea what we’re supposed to be fishing for?’
‘There are lots of sea monsters in the deep.
As long as it’s not …’ A shadow crossed her
face. ‘Never mind. Probably just a sea
monster.’
‘Just a sea monster,’ I said. ‘That’s a relief.’
I was tempted to take the jumbo shrimp
and get out of there, but I had a feeling we’d
need bigger bait if we were going to cause a
ruckus that would attract a sea goddess.
‘The bull’s head it is,’ I decided.

455/1044

Sam hefted her axe. ‘I’m not sure it’ll even
fit on Harald’s boat, but …’
She threw her axe at the meat-hook chain,
which broke with a snap. The bull’s head
crashed to the floor like a large, disgusting
piñata. The axe flew back to Sam’s hand.
Together we gripped the meat hook and
dragged the bull’s head out of the storage
locker. Even with help, I shouldn’t have been
able to move it, but my einherji strength was
up to the task.
Die painfully. Go to Valhalla. Gain the
ability to drag rancid, colossal severed
heads across a dock. Hooray.
When we got to the boat, I yanked the
chain with all my strength. The bull’s head
toppled off the pier and smashed onto the
deck. The S.S. Harald almost capsized, but
somehow it stayed afloat. The bull’s head
took up the back half of the ship. Its tongue

456/1044

hung over the stern. Its left eye rolled up in
its head so it looked seasick.
Harald rose from his bait bucket. If he was
at all surprised or annoyed that I’d dropped a
five-hundred-pound cow head on his boat,
he didn’t show it.
‘An ambitious choice of bait.’ Harald gazed
across the harbour. The sky was darkening.
Light sleet needled the surface of the water.
‘Let’s get going, then. Lovely afternoon to
fish.’

THIRTY-TWO

My Years of Playing
Bassmasters 2000 Really
Pay Off

It was a terrible afternoon to fish.
The sea heaved and so did I, right over the
side several times. The cold didn’t bother
me, but the sleet stung my face. The rocking
of the deck made my legs feel like Slinkys.
Harald the frost giant stood at the wheel,
singing in a guttural language I assumed was
Jotunese.
Sam didn’t seem to mind the rough seas.
She leaned against the bow rail and stared

459/1044

into the grey, her scarf rippling around her
neck like gills.
‘What’s with the scarf anyway?’ I asked.
‘Sometimes you cover your head. Sometimes
you don’t.’
She laid her fingers protectively over the
green silk. ‘It’s a hijab. I wear it when I want
to, or when I think I need to. Like when I
take my grandmother to mosque on Friday,
or –’
‘Or when you see Amir?’
She muttered under her breath. ‘I almost
thought you were going to let that go.’
‘The pigeon said Amir is your intended.
Like … engaged? What are you, like,
sixteen?’
‘Magnus –’
‘I’m just saying, if this is one of those
forced arranged marriages, that’s messed up.
You’re a Valkyrie. You should be able to –’
‘Magnus, shut it. Please.’

460/1044

The boat hit a swell, spraying us with saltwater buckshot.
Samirah gripped the rail. ‘My grandparents are old-fashioned. They were raised in
Baghdad, but fled to the U.S. when Saddam
Hussein was in power.’
‘And …?’
‘They’ve known the Fadlans since forever.
They’re good people. Distant kin. Successful,
kind –’
‘I know. Abdel is awesome. Amir seems
cool. But a forced marriage if you don’t love
the guy –’
‘Ugh! You don’t get it. I’ve been in love
with Amir since I was twelve.’
The boat groaned as it dipped between the
waves. Harald kept singing his Jotunese version of ‘Ninety-nine Bottles of Beer’.
‘Oh,’ I said.
‘Not that it’s any of your business,’
Samirah said.

461/1044

‘Yeah. No.’
‘But sometimes when a family tries to find
a good match they actually care what the girl
thinks.’
‘Okay.’
‘I didn’t realize until I was older … After
my mom died, my grandparents took me in
but, well, my mom wasn’t married when she
had me. That’s still a big deal for my grandparents’ generation.’
‘Yeah.’ I decided not to add: Plus the fact
that your dad was Loki, the father of evil.
Sam seemed to read my thoughts. ‘She was
a doctor, my mom. She found Loki in the
emergency room. He was … I don’t know …
he’d used up too much of his power trying to
appear in Midgard in physical form. He got
trapped somehow, divided between worlds.
His manifestation in Boston was in agony,
weak and helpless.’
‘She cured him?’

462/1044

Sam brushed a droplet of seawater from
her wrist. ‘In a way. She was kind to him. She
stayed by his side. Loki can be very charming
when he wants to be.’
‘I know.’ I blinked. ‘I mean … from the
stories. You’ve met him in person?’
She shot me a dark look. ‘I don’t approve
of my father. He may be charismatic, but he’s
also a liar, a thief, a murderer. He’s visited
me several times. I refused to talk to him,
which drives him nuts. He likes to be noticed. He’s not exactly low-key.’
‘I get it,’ I said. ‘Loki. Low-key.’
She rolled her eyes. ‘Anyway, my mom
mostly raised me by herself. She was headstrong, unconventional. When she died …
well, in the local community, I was damaged
goods, a bastard child. My grandparents
were lucky, very lucky, to get the Fadlans’
blessing for me to marry Amir. I won’t really

463/1044

bring anything to the marriage. I’m not rich
or respectable or –’
‘Come on,’ I said. ‘You’re smart. You’re
tough. You’re an honest-to-Frigg Valkyrie.
And I can’t believe I’m finding reasons to
support your arranged marriage …’
Her dark hair whipped around her, collecting flecks of ice.
‘The Valkyrie thing is a problem,’ she said.
‘My family … well, we’re a little different. We
have a long, long history with the Norse
gods.’
‘How?’
She waved away the question like, Too
much to explain.
‘Still,’ she said, ‘if anyone found out about
my other life … I don’t think Mr Fadlan
would be okay with his eldest son marrying a
girl who moonlights as a soul collector for
pagan gods.’
‘Ah. When you put it that way …’

464/1044

‘I cover for my absences as best I can.’
‘Maths tutoring.’
‘And some simple Valkyrie glamours. But a
good Muslim girl is not supposed to hang out
on her own with strange guys.’
‘Strange guys. Thanks.’
I had a sudden image of Sam sitting in
English class when her phone started to
buzz. The screen flashed: ODIN CALLING. She
dashed to the restroom, changed into her Super Valkyrie costume and flew out of the
nearest window.
‘When you got kicked out of Valhalla … uh,
I mean, I’m sorry about that. But didn’t you
think, Hey, maybe this is a good thing. I can
have a normal life now?’
‘No. That’s the problem. I want both. I
want to marry Amir when the time comes.
But also, all my life, I’ve wanted to fly.’
‘Flying like aeroplanes or flying like zooming around on a magic horse?’

465/1044

‘Both. When I was six, I started drawing
pictures of aeroplanes. I wanted to be a pilot.
How many Arab-American female pilots do
you know?’
‘You would be the first,’ I admitted.
‘I like that idea. Ask me any question
about aeroplanes. I can answer it.’
‘So when you became a Valkyrie –’
‘It was a total rush. A dream come true,
being able to take off at a moment’s notice.
Besides, I felt like I was doing some good. I
could find honourable, brave people who
died protecting others, and I could bring
them to Valhalla. You don’t know how much
I miss that.’
I could hear the pain in her voice. Honourable, brave people … She was including me
in that group. After all the trouble she’d got
into for my sake, I wanted to tell her that it
would be all right. We would figure out a way
so she could have both her lives.

466/1044

But I couldn’t even promise we’d live
through this boat trip.
From the wheelhouse, Harald bellowed,
‘Mortals, you should bait your hooks! We’re
getting close to good fishing!’
Sam shook her head. ‘No. Go further out!’
Harald scowled. ‘Not safe! Any further –’
‘You want your gold or not?’
Harald muttered something that was
probably inappropriate in Jotunese. He
gunned the motor.
I looked at Sam. ‘How do you know we
need to go further?’
‘I can sense it,’ she said. ‘One of the advantages of my father’s blood, I guess. I can
usually tell where the biggest monsters are
lurking.’
‘Joy and happiness.’
I peered into the gloom. I thought about
Ginnungagap, the primordial mist between
ice and fire. We seemed to be sailing right

467/1044

into it. Any moment the sea might dissolve
and we’d fall into oblivion. I hoped I was
wrong. Sam’s grandparents would probably
be ticked off if she didn’t get home in time
for dinner.
The boat shuddered. The sea darkened.
‘There,’ Sam said. ‘Did you feel it? We’ve
passed from Midgard into Jotunheim
waters.’
I pointed off the port bow. A few hundred
yards away, a granite spire jutted out of the
fog. ‘But that’s Graves Light. We’re not too
far from the harbour.’
Sam grabbed one of the giant’s fishing
poles, which looked more appropriate for
heavyweight pole-vaulting. ‘The worlds overlap, Magnus, especially near Boston. Go get
the bait.’
Harald slowed the engines when he saw
me coming aft.

468/1044

‘Too dangerous to fish here,’ he warned.
‘Besides, I doubt you’ll be able to cast that
bait.’
‘Shut up, Harald.’ I grabbed the chain and
dragged the bull’s head forward, almost
knocking the captain overboard with one of
its horns.
When I got back to Sam, we examined the
meat hook, which was embedded pretty well
in the bull’s skull.
‘That should work for a fishing hook,’ Sam
decided. ‘Let’s get this chain tied on.’
We spent a few minutes attaching the
chain to the fishing line – a thin braidedsteel cable that made the reel weigh about
three hundred pounds.
Together, Sam and I rolled the bull’s head
off the front of the boat. It sank slowly into
the icy froth, the bull’s dead eye staring at
me as it submerged, like, Not cool, man!

469/1044

Harald lumbered over, carrying a large
chair. He sank its four feet into anchor holes
on the deck. Then he lashed the seat in place
with steel cables.
‘If I were you, human,’ he said, ‘I’d buckle
up.’
With its leather harnesses, the seat looked
a little too much like an electric chair to me,
but Sam held the fishing pole while I
strapped myself in.
‘So why am I in the chair?’ I asked.
‘Your promise,’ she reminded me. ‘You
swore by your troth.’
‘Troth sucks.’ From the giant’s supply kit, I
pulled some leather gloves that were only
four sizes too big and put them on.
Sam handed me the pole, and then found
gloves for herself.
I had a disjointed memory from when I
was ten years old, watching Jaws with my
mom because she insisted. She warned me it

470/1044

was super scary, but the whole time I was
either bored at the slow pace or laughing at
the schlocky-looking rubber shark.
‘Please let me catch a rubber shark,’ I
muttered now.
Harald cut the engines. Suddenly it was
freakishly quiet. The wind died. The sleet
against the deck sounded like sand hitting
glass. The waves calmed as if the sea were
holding its breath.
Sam stood at the rail, feeding out cable as
the bull’s head sank into the depths. Finally
the line went slack.
‘Did we hit bottom?’ I asked.
Sam bit her lip. ‘I don’t know. I think –’
The line sprang taut with a sound like a
hammer on a saw blade. Sam let go to avoid
being catapulted into space. The pole was
nearly ripped out of my hands, taking my
fingers with it, but somehow I held on.

471/1044

The chair groaned. The leather straps dug
into my collarbones. The entire boat leaned
forward into the waves with timbers creaking
and rivets popping.
‘Ymir’s Blood!’ Harald yelled. ‘We’re
breaking apart!’
‘Give it more line!’ Sam grabbed a bucket.
She poured water on the cable, which
steamed as it raced off the prow.
I gritted my teeth. My arm muscles felt
like warm bread dough. Just when I was sure
I couldn’t hold on any longer, the pulling
stopped. The line hummed with tension,
laser-dotting on the grey water about a hundred yards starboard.
‘What’s going on?’ I asked. ‘Is it resting?’
Harald cursed. ‘I don’t like this. Sea monsters don’t act this way. Even the biggest
catches –’
‘Reel it in,’ Sam said. ‘Now!’

472/1044

I turned the handle. It was like arm-wrestling the Terminator. The rod bent. The cable
creaked. Sam pulled the line, keeping it clear
of the rail, but even with her help I could
barely make any progress.
My shoulders went numb. My lower back
spasmed. Despite the cold, I was soaked with
sweat and shivering with exhaustion. I felt
like I was reeling in a sunken battleship.
From time to time, Sam yelled encouraging things like, ‘No, you idiot! Pull!’
Finally, in front of the boat, the sea
darkened in a fifty-foot-diameter oval. The
waves sloshed and boiled.
Up in the wheelhouse, Harald must have
had a better view of whatever was coming to
the surface. He screamed in a very ungiantish voice, ‘Cut the line!’
‘No,’ Sam said. ‘It’s too late for that.’

473/1044

Harald snatched up a knife. He threw it at
the cable, but Sam deflected the blade with
her axe.
‘Back off, giant!’ she yelled.
‘But you can’t bring that thing up!’ Harald
wailed. ‘It’s the –’
‘Yes, I know!’
The rod began slipping from my hands.
‘Help!’
Sam lunged and grabbed the fishing pole.
She wedged herself next to me in the chair to
assist, but I was too tired and terrified to feel
embarrassed.
‘We may all die,’ she muttered, ‘but this
will definitely get Ran’s attention.’
‘Why?’ I asked. ‘What is that thing?’
Our catch broke the surface and opened its
eyes.
‘Meet my older brother,’ Sam said, ‘the
World Serpent.’

THIRTY-THREE

Sam’s Brother Wakes Up
Kinda Cranky

When I say the serpent opened his eyes, I
mean he switched on green spotlights the
size of trampolines. His irises glowed so intensely I was pretty sure everything I saw for
the rest of my life would be tinted the colour
of lime jelly.
The good news: the rest of my life didn’t
look like it was going to be very long.
The monster’s ridged forehead and
tapered snout made him look more like an
eel than a snake. His hide glistened in a

476/1044

camouflage patchwork of green, brown and
yellow. (Here I am calmly describing him. At
the time the only thought in my mind was:
YIKES! HUGE SNAKE!)
He opened his mouth and hissed – the
stench of rancid bull’s head and poison so
strong my clothes smoked. He may not have
used mouthwash, but obviously the World
Serpent cared about flossing. His teeth
gleamed in rows of perfect white triangles.
His pink maw was big enough to swallow
Harald’s boat and a dozen of Harald’s closest
friends’ boats.
My meat hook was embedded in the back
of his mouth, right where the hangy-down
uvula thing would be in a human mouth. The
serpent didn’t seem too happy about that.
He shook back and forth, raking the steel
line across his teeth. My fishing pole
whipped sideways. The boat seesawed port
to starboard, planks cracking and popping,

477/1044

but somehow we stayed afloat. My line didn’t
break.
‘Sam?’ I said in a small voice. ‘Why hasn’t
he killed us yet?’
She pressed so close to me I could feel her
shivering. ‘I think he’s studying us, maybe
even trying to talk to us.’
‘What is he saying?’
Sam gulped. ‘My guess? How dare you?’
The serpent hissed, spitting globs of poison that sizzled against the deck.
Behind us, Harald whimpered, ‘Drop the
pole, you fools! You’ll get us all killed!’
I tried to meet the serpent’s gaze. ‘Hey, Mr
Jormungand. Can I call you Mr J.? Look,
sorry to bother you. Nothing personal. We’re
just using you to get somebody’s attention.’
Mr J. didn’t like that. His head surged out
of the water, towering above us, then crashed
down again off the bow, triggering a fortyfoot-tall ring of waves.

478/1044

Sam and I were definitely sitting in the
splash zone. I ate saltwater for lunch. My
lungs discovered they could not in fact
breathe the stuff. My eyes got a thorough
power washing. But, incredibly, the boat
didn’t capsize. When the rocking and sloshing subsided, I found myself still alive, still
holding the fishing pole with my line still attached to the World Serpent’s mouth. The
monster stared at me like, Why are you not
dead?
Out of the corner of my eye, I saw the
tsunami crash against the Graves, washing
all the way up to the base of the lighthouse. I
wondered if I’d just flooded Boston.
I remembered why Jormungand was
called the World Serpent. Supposedly his
body was so long it wrapped around the
earth, stretching across the sea floor like a
monstrous telecommunication cable. Most of
the time he kept his tail in his mouth – hey, I

479/1044

used a pacifier until I was almost two, so I
can’t judge – but apparently he’d decided our
bull’s-head bait was worth the switch.
The point being: if the World Serpent was
shaking, the whole world might be shaking
with him.
‘So,’ I said to nobody in particular, ‘what
now?’
‘Magnus,’ Sam said in a strangled tone, ‘try
not to panic. But look off the starboard side.’
I couldn’t imagine what would be more
panic-inducing than Mr J. until I saw the
woman in the whirlpool.
Compared to the serpent, she was tiny –
only about ten feet tall. From the waist up,
she wore a blouse of silver chain mail encrusted with barnacles. She might have once
been beautiful, but her pearlescent skin was
withered, her seaweed-green eyes were milky
with cataracts, and her rippling blonde hair

480/1044

was shot through with grey like blight in a
wheat field.
From the waist down, things got weird.
Spinning around her like a dancer’s skirt, a
waterspout swirled within a silver fishing net
a hundred yards in diameter. Trapped in its
weave was a kaleidoscope of ice floe, dead
fish, plastic garbage bags, car tyres, grocery
carts and other assorted flotsam. As the woman floated towards us, the edge of her net
thwapped against our hull and scraped
against the World Serpent’s neck.
She spoke in a deep baritone. ‘Who dares
interrupt my scavenging?’
Harald the frost giant screamed. He was a
champion screamer. He scrambled to the
bow and threw a bunch of gold coins over the
side. Then he turned to Sam. ‘Quick, girl,
your payment to me! Give it to Ran!’
Sam frowned, but she tossed another five
coins overboard.

481/1044

Instead of sinking, the red gold swirled into Ran’s net and joined the floating merrygo-round of debris.
‘O Great Ran!’ Harald wailed. ‘Please don’t
kill me! Here, take my anchor! Take these
humans! You can even have my lunch box!’
‘Silence!’ The goddess shooed away the
frost giant, who did his best to cower, grovel
and retreat all at the same time.
‘I’ll just be below decks,’ he sobbed.
‘Praying.’
Ran regarded me as if deciding whether I
was large enough to fillet. ‘Release Jormungand, mortal! The last thing I need today is a
world-flooding event.’
The World Serpent hissed in agreement.
Ran turned on him. ‘And you shut up, you
overgrown moray. All your writhing is stirring up the silt. I can’t see a thing down
there. How many times have I told you not to

482/1044

bite at any old rancid bull’s head? Rancid
bulls’ heads are not native to these waters!’
The World Serpent snarled petulantly, tugging at the steel cable in his mouth.
‘O Great Ran,’ I said, ‘I am Magnus Chase.
This is Sam al-Abbas. We’ve come to bargain
with you. Also, just wondering … why can’t
you cut the fishing line yourself?’
Ran let loose a torrent of Norse curses that
literally steamed in the air. Now that she was
closer, I could see stranger things swirling in
her net – ghostly bearded faces, gasping and
terrified as they tried to reach the surface;
hands clawing at the ropes.
‘Worthless einherji,’ said the goddess, ‘you
know full well what you have done.’
‘I do?’ I asked.
‘You are Vanir-spawn! A child of Njord?’
Ran sniffed the air. ‘No, your scent is fainter.
Perhaps a grandchild.’

483/1044

Sam’s eyes widened. ‘Right! Magnus,
you’re the son of Frey, son of Njord – god of
ships, sailors and fishermen. That’s why our
boat didn’t capsize. That’s why you were able
to catch the serpent!’ She looked at Ran.
‘Um, which, of course, we already knew.’
Ran snarled. ‘Once brought to the surface,
the World Serpent is not simply bound by
your fishing line. He is connected to you by
fate! You must now decide, and quickly,
whether to cut him loose and return him to
his slumber, or let him awaken fully and destroy your world!’
In the back of my neck, something
snapped like a rusty spring – probably the
last bit of my courage. I looked at the World
Serpent. For the first time, I noticed that his
glowing green peepers were covered by a
thin translucent membrane – a second set of
eyelids.
‘You mean he’s only partially awake?’

484/1044

‘If he were fully awake,’ said the goddess,
‘your entire Eastern Seaboard would already
be underwater.’
‘Ah.’ I had to resist the urge to throw away
the fishing pole, undo my safety harness and
run around the deck screaming like a little
Harald.
‘I will release him,’ I said. ‘But first, great
Ran, you have to promise to negotiate with
us in good faith. We want to barter.’
‘Barter with you?’ Ran’s skirts swirled
faster. Ice and plastic crackled. Shopping
carts ploughed into one another. ‘By rights,
Magnus Chase, you should belong to me!
You died of drowning. Drowned souls are my
property.’
‘Actually,’ Sam said, ‘he died in combat, so
he belongs to Odin.’
‘Technicalities!’ Ran snapped.
The faces in Ran’s net gaped and gasped,
pleading for help. Sam had told me, There

485/1044

are worse places to spend your afterlife in
than Valhalla. Imagining myself tangled in
that silvery web, I was suddenly grateful to
my Valkyrie.
‘Well, okay then,’ I said. ‘I guess I can just
let Mr J. wake up fully. I didn’t have any
plans for tonight.’
‘No!’ Ran hissed. ‘Do you have any idea
how hard it is to scavenge along the seafloor
when Jormungand gets agitated? Let him
go!’
‘And you promise to negotiate in good
faith?’ I asked.
‘Yes. Fine. I am in no mood for Ragnarok
today.’
‘Say: By my troth –’
‘I am a goddess! I know better than to
swear by my troth!’
I glanced at Sam, who shrugged. She
handed me her axe, and I cut the fishing line.

486/1044

Jormungand sank beneath the waves, glaring at me through a bubbling green cloud of
poison as he descended, as if to say, NEXT
TIME, LITTLE MORTAL.
Ran’s swirling skirts slowed to the speed of
a tropical storm. ‘Very well, einherji. I promised to barter in good faith. What do you
want?’
‘The Sword of Summer,’ I said. ‘I had it
with me when I hit the Charles River.’
Ran’s eyes glistened. ‘Oh, yes. I could give
you the sword. But, in exchange, I would
want something valuable. I’m thinking …
your soul.’

THIRTY-FOUR

My Sword Almost Ends
Up on eBay

‘I’m thinking not,’ I replied.
Ran made a rumbling sound like a whale
with heartburn. ‘You – the grandson of that
meddler, Njord – come here asking to barter,
disturbing the World Serpent, interrupting
my scavenging, and you won’t even agree to
a reasonable offer? The Sword of Summer is
the greatest artefact to come into my nets in
ages. Your soul is a small price to pay in
exchange!’

489/1044

‘Lady Ran.’ Sam took back her axe and
slipped down from the fishing chair. ‘Magnus has already been claimed by Odin. He is
einherji. That cannot be changed.’
‘Besides,’ I said, ‘you don’t want my soul.
It’s really small. I don’t use it much. I doubt
it even works any more.’
The goddess’s watery skirts swirled.
Trapped souls clawed for the surface. Plastic
garbage bags popped like bubble wrap. The
smell of dead fish almost made me nostalgic
for the bull’s head.
‘What do you offer me, then?’ Ran demanded. ‘What could possibly be worth that
sword?’
Good question, I thought.
I stared into the goddess’s nets and an idea
began to form.
‘You said you were scavenging,’ I recalled.
‘What for?’

490/1044

The goddess’s expression softened. Her
eyes shone a greedier shade of green. ‘Many
things. Coins. Souls. Lost valuables of every
description. Just before you woke the serpent, I had my eye on a Chevy Malibu radial
hubcap that was worth forty dollars easy.
Just sitting there at the bottom of the harbour. But now –’ she threw up her hands –
‘gone.’
‘You collect stuff.’ I corrected myself: ‘I
mean … wonderful treasures.’
Sam squinted at me, clearly wondering if
I’d lost my mind, but I was starting to understand what made Ran tick – what she cared
about most.
The goddess stretched her fingers towards
the horizon. ‘Have you heard of the Pacific
garbage patch?’
‘I have, Lady Ran,’ Sam said. ‘It’s a floating
collection of rubbish the size of Texas. It
sounds terrible.’

491/1044

‘It is amazing,’ said the goddess. ‘The first
time I saw it, I was overwhelmed! It put my
own collection to shame. For centuries, all
shipwrecks of the northern seas have been
mine to claim. Anything lost in the depths
comes to me. But when I saw the wonders of
the garbage patch I realized how puny my efforts had been. Ever since, I’ve spent all my
time scavenging the seafloor, looking for additions to my net. I would not have found
your sword if I hadn’t been so quick!’
I nodded with sympathy. Now I could fit
this Norse goddess into the Magnus Chase
world view. Ran was a bag lady. I could work
with a bag lady.
I peered overboard at the floating junk. A
silver teaspoon balanced on an island of
styrofoam. A bicycle wheel spun past, shredding the ghostly head of a lost soul.

492/1044

‘Lady Ran,’ I said, ‘your husband, Aegir, is
the lord of the sea, right? You share a golden
palace with him at the bottom of the ocean?’
The goddess scowled. ‘What is your point?’
‘Well … what does your husband think of
your collection?’
‘Aegir.’ Ran spat. ‘The great stirrer of sea
storms! These days the only thing he wants
to do is brew his mead. He’s always been a
brewer, but lately it’s ridiculous. He spends
all his time at the hops shop, or going on
brewery tours with his buddies. And don’t
get me started on the flannel shirt, rolled-up
skinny jeans, glasses and the way he trims
his beard. He’s always talking about microbrews. He has a cauldron a mile wide! How
can he microbrew?’
‘Right,’ I said. ‘That must be annoying. He
doesn’t appreciate how important your treasures are.’

493/1044

‘He has his lifestyle,’ Ran said. ‘I have
mine!’
Sam looked bewildered, but all of this
made total sense to me. I knew a bag lady in
Charlestown whose husband had left her a
six-million-dollar mansion on Beacon Hill,
but sitting at home alone had made her feel
suffocated, lonely and unhappy. So instead
she lived out on the streets, pushing her
shopping cart, collecting plastic lawn ornaments and aluminium cans. That made her
feel complete.
Ran frowned. ‘What were we talking about
again?’
‘The Sword of Summer,’ I said. ‘And what I
could offer you in return.’
‘Yes!’
‘What I’m offering,’ I said, ‘is to let you
keep your collection.’

494/1044

Frost spread down the ropes of the net.
Ran’s tone turned dangerous. ‘Are you
threatening to take my stuff?’
‘Oh, no. I would never do that. I understand how valuable –’
‘Because this whirling plastic sunflower
ornament right here? They don’t make these
any more! It’s easily worth ten dollars.’
‘Right. But, if you don’t give me the Sword
of Summer, Surt and his fire giants will come
looking for it. And they won’t show you such
respect.’
Ran scoffed. ‘The sons of Muspell cannot
touch me. My realm is deadly to them.’
‘But Surt has many allies,’ Sam said, picking up on the idea. ‘They would annoy you,
harass you, take your … treasures. They’ll do
anything to retrieve that sword. Once they
have it, they’ll start Ragnarok. Then there
will be no more scavenging. The oceans will
boil. Your collection will be destroyed.’

495/1044

‘No!’ shrieked the goddess.
‘Yes,’ I said. ‘But if you give us the sword
Surt won’t have any reason to bother you.
We’ll keep it safe.’
Ran scowled at her nets, studying the patterns of glittering trash. ‘And how, son of
Frey, will the sword be safer with you than
with me? You cannot return it to your father.
Frey gave up his rights to use the weapon
when he gifted it to Skirnir.’
For the millionth time, I wanted to find my
frolicking summer-god dad and smack him.
Why had he given away his weapon in the
first place? For love? Weren’t gods supposed
to be smarter than that? Then again, Ran
collected hubcaps, and Aegir was into
microbrewing.
‘I’ll wield it myself,’ I said. ‘Or I’ll take it
back to Valhalla for safekeeping.’
‘In other words, you don’t know.’ The goddess arched her kelpy eyebrows at Sam. ‘And

496/1044

you, daughter of Loki, why are you siding
with the gods of Asgard? Your father is no
friend of theirs – not any more.’
‘I’m not my father,’ Sam said. ‘I’m a – I
was a Valkyrie.’
‘Ah, yes. The girl who dreamed of flying.
But the thanes of Valhalla expelled you. Why
do you still try to earn their favour? You
don’t need them to fly. You know very well
that with your father’s blood –’
‘Give us the sword, Lady Ran.’ Sam’s voice
hardened. ‘It’s the only way to delay
Ragnarok.’
The goddess smiled sourly. ‘You even
sound like Loki. He was such a persuasive
speaker – one moment flattering, the next
moment threatening. Once, he actually convinced me to lend him my net! That led to all
sorts of trouble. Loki figured out the secrets
of net weaving. The gods learned how, then
the humans. Pretty soon everyone had nets.

497/1044

My trademark item! I won’t be so easily convinced again. I’ll keep the sword and take my
chances with Surt.’
I unstrapped myself from the fishing chair.
I moved to the tip of the bow and locked eyes
with the goddess. I didn’t normally shake
down bag ladies, but I had to make Ran take
me seriously. I lifted the chain from my belt.
The silver links glinted in the fading light.
‘This chain is also a sword,’ I said. ‘An authentic blade from Valhalla. How many of
those do you have in your net?’
Ran started to reach for the chain, then
caught herself. ‘Yes … I can see the sword
through the glamour. But why would I trade
–’
‘A new sword for an old one,’ I offered.
‘This blade is shinier, only used once in combat. You could get twenty bucks for it, no
problem. The Sword of Summer, however,
has no resale value.’

498/1044

‘Mmm, true, but –’
‘The other option,’ I said, ‘is I take the
Sword of Summer. It belongs to me.’
Ran growled. Her fingernails stretched into jagged points like sharks’ teeth. ‘You dare
threaten me, mortal?’
‘Just telling the truth,’ I said, trying to stay
calm. ‘I can sense the sword within your
nets.’ (Total lie.) ‘I pulled it from the depths
once before. I can do it again. The sword is
the sharpest weapon in the Nine Worlds. Do
you really want it cutting through your net,
spilling all your stuff and freeing all those
trapped souls? If they got away, do you think
they’d fight for you or against you?’
Her gaze wavered. ‘You would not dare.’
‘Trade me a sword for a sword,’ I said.
‘And throw in one of Idun’s apples for our
trouble.’
Ran hissed. ‘You said nothing about an
apple!’

499/1044

‘That’s an easy request,’ I said. ‘I know
you’ve got an extra apple of immortality
swirling around in there somewhere. Then
we’ll go in peace. We’ll stop Ragnarok and let
you go back to your scavenging. Otherwise –’
I shrugged – ‘you’ll find out what the son of
Frey can do with his father’s sword.’
I was pretty sure the goddess would laugh
in my face, capsize the boat and add our
drowned souls to her collection. But I stared
her down like I had nothing to lose.
After a count of twenty – long enough for a
bead of sweat to trickle down my neck and
freeze at my collar – Ran snarled, ‘Very well.’
She flicked her hand. The Sword of Summer came flying out of the water and landed
in my grip. Immediately it began to hum,
agitating every molecule in my body.
I tossed my chain overboard. ‘Now the
apple.’

500/1044

A piece of fruit shot out from the net. It
would’ve beaned Sam between the eyes if not
for her fast reflexes. The apple didn’t look
like much – just a shrivelled Golden Delicious – but Sam held it gingerly, as if it were
radioactive. She slipped it into her coat
pocket.
‘Go now, as you promised,’ Ran said. ‘But I
tell you this, son of Frey: your high-handed
bargaining will cost you dearly. You have
made an enemy of Ran. My husband, Aegir,
lord of the waves, will also hear about this, if
I can ever get him out of the hops shop. For
your sake, I hope you’re not planning any
more sea voyages. Next time, your kinship
with Njord will not save you. Cross my waters again and I will personally drag your
soul to the bottom.’
‘Well,’ I said, ‘that’s something to look forward to.’

501/1044

Ran spun. Her form blurred into a misty
funnel cloud, her nets wrapping around her
like twirled spaghetti. She sank into the
depths and was gone.
Sam shuddered. ‘That was interesting.’
Behind us, a ladder creaked. Harald’s head
popped up from below.
‘Interesting?’ he demanded. ‘Did you say it
was interesting?’
He climbed out, glowering at us, his fists
balled, his icy blue beard dripping. ‘World
Serpent fishing – that’s one thing. But antagonizing Ran? I never would have taken you
aboard if I had known, no matter what Big
Boy said! I have to make a living on the
ocean! I should throw you overboard –’
‘I’ll double your price,’ Sam said. ‘Ten red
gold. Just get us back to dock.’
Harald blinked. ‘Okay.’ He headed for the
wheelhouse.

502/1044

I studied the Sword of Summer. Now that
I had it, I wasn’t sure what to do with it. The
steel glowed with its own light, silvery runes
burning along the flat of the blade. The
sword radiated warmth, heating the air
around me, melting the frost on the railings,
filling me with the same sense of quiet power
I felt when I healed someone. It wasn’t so
much like holding a weapon … more like
holding open a door to a different time,
walking with my mom in the Blue Hills, feeling the sunlight on my face.
Sam reached over. Still wearing her oversize leather gloves, she brushed a tear from
my cheek.
I hadn’t realized I was crying.
‘Sorry,’ I said, my voice hoarse.
Sam studied me with concern. ‘Could you
really have summoned the sword from Ran?’
‘I don’t know.’

503/1044

‘In that case, you’re insane. But I’m
impressed.’
I lowered the blade. It kept humming as if
trying to tell me something.
‘What did Ran mean?’ I asked. ‘She said
you didn’t need to be a Valkyrie to fly. Something about your father’s blood?’
Sam’s expression closed up faster than
Ran’s nets. ‘It’s not important.’
‘You sure about that?’
She hung her axe on her belt. She looked
everywhere but my eyes. ‘As sure as you
could summon that sword.’
The outboard engines rumbled. The ship
began to turn.
‘I’ll be at the wheel with Harald,’ Sam said,
apparently anxious to put some distance
between us. ‘I’ll make sure he takes us to Boston and not Jotunheim.’

THIRTY-FIVE

Thou Shalt Not Poop on
the Head of Art

After giving me the slightly shrivelled apple
of immortality, Sam left me at the docks. Not
that she wanted to, she said, but her grandparents were going to murder her, and she
didn’t want to be any later for that. We made
plans to meet the next morning at the Public
Garden.
I made my way towards Copley Square. I
felt a little self-conscious walking the streets
with a glowing broadsword, so I had a

506/1044

conversation with my weapon. (Because that
wasn’t crazy at all.)
‘Could you do a glamour and turn into
something smaller?’ I asked it. ‘Preferably
not a chain, since it’s no longer the 1990s?’
The sword didn’t reply (duh), but I imagined it was humming at a more interrogative pitch, like, Such as what?
‘I dunno. Something pocket-size and innocuous. A pen, maybe?’
The sword pulsed, almost like it was
laughing. I imagined it saying, A pen sword.
That is the stupidest thing I’ve ever heard.
‘You have a better idea?’ I asked it.
The sword shrank in my hand, melting into a runestone on a gold chain. The small
white stone was emblazoned with a black
symbol:

507/1044

‘The rune of Frey,’ I said. ‘I’m not really a
jewellery guy, but okay.’
I fastened the chain around my neck. I discovered the stone was attached magnetically
to its bail, so I could easily pull it off the
chain. As soon as I did, the stone grew into a
sword. If I wanted it back in pendant form,
all I had to do was picture that. The sword
shrank into a stone, and I could reattach it to
the necklace.
‘Cool,’ I admitted.
Perhaps the sword really had heard my request. Perhaps I’d somehow created the
glamour by myself. Or maybe I was hallucinating and wearing a huge sword around my
neck.
I doubted anyone would look twice at my
new medallion.
They’d see the and assume it stood for
ailure.

508/1044

By the time I reached Copley Square it was
fully dark out. No sign of Blitz or Hearthstone, which made me apprehensive. The library had closed for the night. I wondered if
Big Boy expected me to meet him on the
roof, but I wasn’t about to climb the walls of
the library.
It had been a long day. Einherji superwarrior strength or not, I was exhausted and
shaking from hunger. If Big Boy wanted the
apple, he would have to come get it. Otherwise I’d eat it myself.
I sat on the front steps of the library, the
stone swaying under me like I was still on
Harald’s ship. To either side of me, a bronze
lady statue reclined on a marble throne. I remembered that one symbolized Art and the
other Science, but to me they both looked
ready for recess. They leaned on their armrests, metal shawls covering their heads,

509/1044

glancing in my direction like, Tough week,
huh?
This was the first time I’d been alone and
not in imminent danger since … the funeral
home? Did it count as being alone if you
were staring at your own dead body?
My memorial service had probably
happened by now. I imagined my coffin being lowered into an icy grave; Uncle Randolph leaning on his cane, frowning resentfully; Uncle Frederick looking baffled and
distressed in his mismatched clothes; and
Annabeth … I couldn’t imagine what she was
feeling.
She’d rushed to Boston to find me. She’d
learned I was dead. Then she learned I
wasn’t dead, but she still had to attend my
funeral and not tell anyone she’d seen me.
I believed she would keep her promise, but
our meeting had unsettled me. Some of the

510/1044

things she’d said: I can help you. I know a
place where you’ll be safe.
I pulled the battered flyer from my coat
pocket. MISSING! MAGNUS CHASE, 16 YEARS OLD.
PLEASE CALL. I studied Annabeth’s phone
number, committing it to memory. I owed
her an explanation, but not yet. I’d already
got Hearthstone knocked unconscious, Blitzen half petrified and Sam kicked out of the
Valkyries. I couldn’t risk dragging anyone
else into my problems.
According to the Norns, Fenris Wolf would
be unleashed seven days from now unless I
stopped it from happening. Ragnarok would
begin. Surt would consume the Nine Worlds
in fire. I would never find my mom or get
justice for her murder.
Despite all that, every time I thought about
facing a wolf – facing the Wolf, Fenris himself – I wanted to curl up in my old sleeping

511/1044

bag, stick my fingers in my ears and hum,
La, la, la, it’s not happening.
A shadow swooped over my head. Big Boy
the eagle landed on the bronze statue to my
left and promptly decorated her head with
eagle droppings.
‘Dude,’ I said, ‘you just pooped on Art.’
‘Did I?’ Big Boy lifted his tail feathers. ‘Ah,
well. I imagine she’s used to it. I see you survived your fishing expedition!’
‘Surprised?’ I asked.
‘Yes, actually. Do you have my apple?’
I pulled it from my pocket and tossed it
over. Big Boy caught it in his left claw and
began to eat. ‘Ah, that’s the stuff!’
I’d seen some strange things recently, but
an eagle eating an apple atop the poopy head
of Art was definitely in the top twenty.
‘So will you tell me who you are, now?’ I
asked.

512/1044

Big Boy burped. ‘I suppose you’ve earned
it. I’ll confess: I’m not really an eagle.’
‘I’m shocked. Shocked, I tell you.’
He snapped off another chunk of apple.
‘Also, I doubt you’ll make many friends
among the gods when they learn you’ve assisted me.’
‘Wonderful,’ I said. ‘I’m already on Ran
and Aegir’s naughty list.’
‘Oh, those two aren’t properly gods. They
are neither Aesir nor Vanir. I think they’re
more giantish, though of course the line
between giant and god has always been
blurred. Our clans have intermarried so
many times over the years.’
‘Our clans. Meaning …’
The eagle grew. Shadows folded around
him, adding to his size like a snowball gathering mass. His shape resolved into a huge
old man lounging in the lap of Art. He wore
iron-shod boots, leather breeches and a tunic

513/1044

of eagle feathers that was probably not in
compliance with the Endangered Species
Act. His hair was grey, his face weathered
with age. On one forearm he wore a gold
bracer encrusted with bloodstones – the sort
of armband worn by the thanes in Valhalla.
‘You’re a lord?’ I asked.
‘A king, in fact.’ Big Boy took another bite
of apple. Immediately his hair darkened and
some of his wrinkles faded. ‘Utgard-Loki at
your service!’
I curled my fingers around my sword
pendant. ‘Loki as in Loki Loki?’
The giant king made a sour face. ‘You have
no idea how many times I get that question.
Are you the “famous” Loki?’ He put famous
in air quotes. ‘Ugh! I was named Loki before
he ever came along. It’s a popular name
among giants! At any rate – no, Magnus
Chase, I am not related to the famous Loki. I
am Utgard-Loki, meaning Loki of the

514/1044

Outlands, king of the mountain giants. I’ve
been watching you for years.’
‘I get that a lot.’
‘Well, you’re much more interesting than
those dense children of Thor who usually
challenge me. You’ll make a wonderful
enemy!’
Pressure built in my ear canals. ‘We’re enemies now?’
‘Oh, there’s no need to draw your sword
just yet. Nice pendant, though. Someday
we’ll find ourselves on opposite sides. That
can’t be helped. But, for the present, I’m
happy to observe. I hope you’ll learn to use
the sword without getting yourself killed.
That would be amusing. Surt, the old bag of
smoke, deserves to be humiliated.’
‘Well, I’m always happy to amuse you.’
The giant popped the rest of the apple in
his mouth and swallowed it whole. He now
looked about twenty-five, with coal-black

515/1044

hair, his handsome angular face free of
wrinkles.
‘Speaking of Surt,’ he said, ‘the fire lord
will never let you keep that sword. You have
… probably until morning before he realizes
that you’ve found it.’
My hand dropped from my pendant. My
arms felt like wet sandbags. ‘I impaled Surt,
cut off his nose and dropped him in an icy
river. That didn’t even slow him down?’
‘Oh, it did! Right now he’s nothing but a
seething noseless ball of fire, raging down in
Muspellheim. He’ll have to conserve all his
power to manifest again on the day of the full
moon.’
‘When he tries to free the Wolf.’ Maybe I
shouldn’t have been chatting about that with
a self-declared enemy, but something told
me Utgard-Loki already knew.
The giant nodded. ‘Surt is more anxious
than anyone for Ragnarok to start. He knows

516/1044

he’ll get to consume the Nine Worlds in
flames, and that’s what he’s been waiting for
since the dawn of time. Me, I like the way
things are! I’m having fun. But fire giants …
ah, there’s no reasoning with them. It’s all
burn, burn, burn. Anyway, the good news is
that Surt won’t be able to kill you personally
until the full moon. He’s much too weak. The
bad news: he has lots of minions.’
‘I hate minions.’
‘Surt’s not the only one after you. Your
former comrades from Valhalla have been
searching. They’re not pleased that you left
without permission.’
I thought about Captain Gunilla and her
bandolier of hammers. I imagined one spinning towards my face. ‘Well, that’s just
perfect.’
‘If I were you, Magnus, I’d get out of
Midgard by dawn. That should throw your
pursuers off your trail, at least temporarily.’

517/1044

‘Leave the earth. Simple as that.’
‘I knew you were a quick learner.’ UtgardLoki slid off the statue’s lap. Standing up, he
was easily twelve feet tall. ‘We’ll meet again,
Magnus Chase. Someday you’ll need a favour
only Utgard-Loki can grant. But for now …
your friends would like a word. Farewell!’
Shadows funnelled around him. UtgardLoki was gone. In his place stood Blitzen and
Hearthstone.
Hearth leaped away from me like a
startled cat.
Blitzen dropped his duffel bag. ‘Heimdall’s
Horn, kid! Where did you come from?’
‘Where did I – I’ve been here for almost an
hour. I was talking to a giant.’
Hearth crept towards me. He poked me in
the chest to see if I was real.
We have been here for hours, he signed.
Waiting for you. We talked to giant. You
just appeared.

518/1044

A sick feeling rose in my chest. ‘Maybe we
should compare notes.’
I told them what had happened since we
parted ways: Harald’s boat; Mr J. and Bag
Lady Ran (which would make an awesome
name for a rapper duo); and my conversation with Utgard-Loki.
‘Ah. Not good.’ Blitzen stroked his beard.
He’d dispensed with the anti-sun gear and
was now wearing an eggplant-purple threepiece suit with a mauve shirt and a green
carnation in the lapel. ‘The giant told us
some of the same things, but … the giant did
not tell us his own name.’
Hearth signed, Surprise, opening his
pinched fingers on either side of his eyes,
which in this context I took to mean YIKES!
Utgard-Loki. He spelled out the name.
Most powerful sorcerer of Jotunheim. Can
make any illusion.

519/1044

‘We were lucky,’ Blitz said. ‘Utgard-Loki
could’ve tricked us into seeing or doing anything. He could’ve made us walk off a roof,
accidentally kill each other or even eat steak
tartare. In fact –’ Blitz narrowed his eyes –
‘we could still be in an illusion. Any of us
might be giants.’
Blitzen punched Hearthstone in the arm.
OUCH! Hearth signed. He stepped on the
dwarf’s toes.
‘Or maybe not,’ Blitzen decided. ‘Still, this
is very bad. Magnus, you’ve given an apple of
immortality to a giant king.’
‘And … what does that mean, exactly?’
Blitz fiddled with his carnation. ‘To be
honest, I’m not sure. I’ve never understood
how those apples work. I imagine it will
make Utgard-Loki stronger as well as younger. And, make no mistake, when Ragnarok
comes he won’t be on our side.’

520/1044

Hearthstone signed, Wish I’d known it
was Utgard-Loki. I could have asked about
magic.
‘Hmph,’ Blitz said. ‘You know plenty.
Besides, you can’t trust a giant to give you
straight answers. Right now, you two need
sleep. Elves can’t stay awake very long
without sunlight. And Magnus looks like he’s
going to fall over.’
Blitz was right. I was starting to see double
Blitzens and double Hearthstones, and I
didn’t think it had anything to do with
illusions.
We made camp in the library doorway,
just like old times except with better supplies. Blitz pulled three down sleeping bags
out of his duffel, along with a fresh change of
clothes for me and some sandwiches, which I
ate too fast to taste. Hearth collapsed in his
bag and immediately began snoring.

521/1044

‘Rest,’ Blitz told me. ‘I’ll keep watch. Tomorrow, we visit my kin.’
‘The dwarf world?’ My thoughts were getting fuzzy. ‘Your home?’
‘My home.’ Blitzen sounded uneasy. ‘Some
of the research Hearth and I did today – it’s
looking like we’ll need more information
about the rope that bound Fenris. We can
only get that in Nidavellir.’ He focused on the
chain around my neck. ‘Can I see it? The
sword?’
I pulled off the pendant and set the sword
between us, its light making Blitz’s face glitter like a vein of copper in the dark.
‘Breathtaking,’ he murmured. ‘Bone steel
… or something even more exotic.’
‘Bone steel … T.J. in Valhalla mentioned
that.’
Blitz didn’t touch the blade, but he passed
his hand over it reverently. ‘To make steel,
iron is smelted with carbon. Most

522/1044

swordsmiths use coal, but you can also use
bones – the bones of enemies, or monsters,
or ancestors.’
‘Oh …’ I stared at the blade, wondering if
my great-great-grandparents might be in
there somewhere.
‘Forged correctly,’ Blitz said, ‘bone steel
can cut down supernatural creatures, even
giants and gods. Of course, you have to
quench the blade in blood to harden it,
preferably the blood of whatever type of
creature you want the sword to be most lethal against.’
The sandwiches weren’t sitting so well in
my stomach. ‘This blade was made like that?’
‘I don’t know,’ Blitz admitted. ‘The sword
of Frey is Vanir work, which is a mystery to
me. It might be closer to Hearth’s elf magic.’
My spirits sank. I’d had this idea that
dwarves were good with weapon crafting. In
the back of my mind, I’d been hoping Blitzen

523/1044

could tell me something about the blade’s
secrets.
I glanced at Hearth, still snoring peacefully. ‘You said Hearth knew a lot of magic.
I’m not criticizing. I’ve just never seen him
cast any … well, except maybe opening one
door. What else can he do?’
Blitz set his hand protectively next to
Hearth’s feet. ‘Magic drains him. He’s careful
about using it. Also his family …’
He took a deep breath. ‘Modern elves don’t
approve of magic. His parents shamed
Hearthstone pretty badly. It still makes him
self-conscious about casting magic in front of
others. Hearthstone wasn’t the son his parents wanted, between the magic and the, you
know …’ Blitz tapped his own earlobes.
I felt like saying something rude about
Hearthstone’s parents in sign language. ‘It’s
not his fault he’s deaf.’

524/1044

‘Elves.’ Blitz shrugged. ‘They have a low
tolerance for anything that isn’t perfect –
music, art, appearances. Their own children.’
I wanted to protest how messed up that
was. Then I thought about humans, and I decided we weren’t much better.
‘Get some sleep, kid,’ Blitz urged. ‘Big day
tomorrow. To keep Fenris Wolf bound, we’re
going to need help from a certain dwarf …
and that help isn’t going to come cheap.
We’ll need you at full strength when we jump
to Nidavellir.’
‘Jump …’ I said. ‘What do you mean
jump?’
He gave me a worried look, as if I might be
getting another funeral very soon. ‘In the
morning, you’re going to try climbing the
World Tree.’

THIRTY-SIX

Duck!

Call me crazy.
I was expecting the World Tree to be a
tree. Not a row of bronze ducks.
‘Behold!’ Blitzen said. ‘The nexus of the
universe!’
Hearthstone knelt reverently.
I glanced at Sam, who had joined us after a
daring escape from first-period physics. She
wasn’t laughing.
‘So …’ I said, ‘I’m just going to point out
that this is the Make Way for Ducklings
statue.’

527/1044

‘Do you think it’s a coincidence?’ Blitzen
demanded. ‘Nine Worlds? Nine ducks? The
symbolism screams portal! This spot is the
crux of creation, the centre of the tree, the
easiest place to jump from one duck – I
mean one world – to another.’
‘If you say so.’ I’d passed these bronze
ducks a thousand times. I’d never considered
them much of a nexus. I hadn’t read the children’s book they were based on, but I
gathered it was about a mama duck and her
babies crossing a street in Boston, so they
put a sculpture of it in the Public Garden.
In the summer, little kids would sit on Mrs
Mallard and get their pictures taken. At
Christmas, the ducks got little Santa hats. At
the moment they were naked and alone, buried up to their necks in fresh snowfall.
Hearthstone passed his hands over the
statues like he was testing a stovetop for
heat.

528/1044

He glanced at Blitz and shook his head.
‘As I feared,’ Blitz said. ‘Hearth and I have
been travelling too much. We won’t be able
to activate the ducks. Magnus, we’ll need
you.’
I waited for an explanation, but Blitz just
studied the sculptures. He was testing out a
new hat this morning – a pith helmet with
dark netting that draped to his shoulders.
According to Blitz, the net fabric was his own
design. It blocked ninety-eight per cent of
the sunlight, allowing us to see his face while
not covering up his fashionable outfit. It
made him look like a beekeeper in mourning.
‘Okay, I’ll bite,’ I said. ‘How do I activate
ducks?’
Sam scanned our surroundings. She didn’t
look like she’d slept much. Her eyes were
puffy. Her hands were raw and blistered
from our fishing expedition. She’d changed
into a black wool trench coat, but otherwise

529/1044

she was dressed the same as yesterday: green
hijab, axe, shield, jeans, winter boots – all
the accoutrements of a fashionable exValkyrie.
‘However you do it,’ she said, ‘do it
quickly. I don’t like how close we are to the
gates of Valhalla.’
‘But I don’t know how,’ I protested. ‘Don’t
you guys go world-jumping all the time?’
Hearth signed, Too much.
‘Kid,’ Blitz said, ‘the more frequently you
travel between the worlds, the harder it gets.
It’s kind of like overheating an engine. At
some point, you have to stop and let the engine cool down. Besides, jumping randomly
from one world to another is one thing. Travelling on a quest – that’s different. We can’t
be sure where exactly we need to go.’
I turned to Sam. ‘What about you?’
‘When I was a Valkyrie, it would’ve been
no problem. But now?’ She shook her head.

530/1044

‘You’re a child of Frey. Your father is the god
of growth and fertility. You should be able to
coax Yggdrasil’s branches close enough to let
us jump on. Besides, it’s your quest. You
have the best chance of navigating. Just use
the sculpture as a point of focus. Find us the
quickest path.’
She would’ve had better luck explaining
calculus to me.
I felt stupid, but I knelt next to the sculpture. I touched the duckling at the end of the
line. Cold crept up my arm. I sensed ice, fog
and darkness – somewhere harsh and
unwelcoming.
‘This,’ I decided, ‘is the quickest way to
Niflheim.’
‘Excellent,’ Blitz said. ‘Let’s not go there.’
I was just reaching for the next duck when
someone yelled, ‘MAGNUS CHASE!’
Two hundred yards away, on the opposite
side of Charles Street, Captain Gunilla stood

531/1044

flanked by two other Valkyries. Behind them
was a line of einherjar. I couldn’t make out
their expressions, but the grey looming mass
of X the half-troll was unmistakable. Gunilla
had drafted my own hallmates to fight
against me.
My fingers twitched with anger. I wanted
to get a meat hook and go fishing with
Gunilla as bait. I reached for my pendant.
‘Magnus, no,’ Sam said. ‘Concentrate on
the ducks. We have to change worlds now.’
On either side of Gunilla, the Valkyries
slung glowing spears from their backs. They
yelled at the einherjar to ready their
weapons. Gunilla pulled two of her hammers
and threw them in our direction.
Sam deflected one with her shield. She
knocked the other aside with her axe, spinning the hammer into the nearest willow
tree, where it embedded itself up to the

532/1044

handle. Across the street, all three Valkyries
rose into the air.
‘I can’t fight them all,’ Sam warned. ‘It’s
leave now or be captured.’
My anger turned to panic. I looked at the
row of bronze ducks, but my concentration
was shattered. ‘I – I need more time.’
‘We don’t have time!’ Sam deflected another hammer. The force of the blow cracked
her shield down the middle.
‘Hearth.’ Blitzen nudged the elf’s arm.
‘Now would be good.’
A frown tugged at the corners of Hearthstone’s mouth. He reached into his pouch
and pulled out a runestone. He cupped it in
his hands and muttered to it silently, as if
speaking to a captured bird. He threw the
stone into the air.
It exploded above us, creating a rune of
burning golden light:

533/1044

Between Gunilla’s hunting party and us,
distance seemed to elongate. The Valkyries
flew towards us at top speed; my einherjar
comrades drew their weapons and charged –
but they made no progress.
It reminded me of those cheap 1970s cartoons where a character runs but the scenery
behind him just keeps repeating itself.
Charles Street spiralled around our pursuers
like a giant hamster wheel. For the first time,
I got what Sam had told me about runes being able to change reality.
‘Raidho,’ Blitzen said appreciatively. ‘It
stands for the wheel, the journey. Hearthstone has bought you some time.’
Only seconds, Hearth signed. Hurry.
He promptly collapsed into Sam’s arms.

534/1044

I ran my hands quickly across the bronze
ducks. At the fourth one, I stopped. I felt
warmth, safety … a sense of rightness.
‘This one,’ I said.
‘Well, open it!’ Blitzen shouted.
I rose to my feet. Not sure what I was doing, I pulled my pendant from its chain. The
Sword of Summer appeared in my hands. Its
blade purred like a demented cat. I tapped it
against the bronze duck and sliced upward.
The air parted like a curtain. Stretching in
front of me, instead of a sidewalk, was an expanse of tree branches. The nearest one, as
wide as Beacon Street, ran directly under us,
maybe three feet down, suspended over a
grey void. Unfortunately, the cut I’d made in
the fabric of Midgard was already closing.
‘Hurry!’ I said. ‘Jump!’
Blitzen didn’t hesitate. He leaped through
the rift.

535/1044

Over on Charles Street, Gunilla screamed
in outrage. She and her Valkyries were still
flying full-tilt on their cartoon hamster
wheel, the einherjar stumbling along behind
them.
‘You are doomed, Magnus Chase!’ Gunilla
shouted. ‘We will pursue you to the ends of
–’
With a loud POP, Hearth’s spell broke. The
einherjar fell face first in the street. The
three Valkyries shot over our heads. Judging
from the sound of breaking glass, they must
have hit a building over on Arlington Street.
I didn’t wait for my old hallmates to recover their senses.
I grabbed Hearth’s left arm while Sam
took his right. Together, we leaped into the
World Tree.

THIRTY-SEVEN

I Am Trash-Talked by a
Squirrel

I always liked climbing trees.
My mom had been pretty understanding
about that. She’d only get nervous if I got
above twenty feet. Then a little tension crept
into her voice. ‘Pumpkin, that branch may
not hold you. Could you come down a little?’
On the World Tree, every branch would
hold me. The biggest ones were wider than
Interstate 93. The smallest were as large as
your average redwood. As for Yggdrasil’s
trunk, it was so immense it just didn’t

538/1044

compute. Each crevice in its surface seemed
to lead to a different world, as if someone
had wrapped tree bark around a column of
television monitors glowing with a million
different movies.
The wind roared, ripping at my new denim
jacket. Beyond the tree’s canopy I saw nothing but a hazy white glow. Below was no
ground – just more branches crisscrossing
the void. The tree had to be rooted somewhere, but I felt woozy and unbalanced – as
if Yggdrasil and everything it contained, including my world, was free-floating in primordial mist – the Ginnungagap.
If I fell here, in the best-case scenario I’d
hit another branch and break my neck.
Worst-case scenario, I’d keep falling forever
into the Great White Nothingness.
I must’ve been leaning forward, because
Blitzen grabbed my arm. ‘Careful, kid. First
time in the tree will make you dizzy.’

539/1044

‘Yeah, I noticed.’
Hearthstone still sagged between Sam and
me. He tried to find his footing, but his
ankles kept bending in odd directions.
Sam stumbled. Her broken shield slipped
from her grip and somersaulted into the
abyss.
She crouched, a look of barely controlled
panic in her eyes. ‘I liked Yggdrasil a lot better when I could fly.’
‘What about Gunilla and the others?’ I
asked. ‘Will they be able to follow us?’
‘Not easily,’ Sam said. ‘They can open another portal, but it won’t necessarily lead to
the same branch of the tree. Still, we should
keep moving. Being on Yggdrasil is not good
for your sanity.’
Hearthstone managed to stand on his own.
He signed, I’m okay. Let’s go. Though his
hands were so shaky it looked more like: You
are a rabbit tunnel.

540/1044

We moved further along the branch.
The Sword of Summer hummed in my
hand, tugging me along like it knew where
we were going. I hoped it did, anyway.
Hostile winds buffeted us from side to
side. Branches swayed, throwing deep pools
of shadow and brilliant patches of light
across our path. A leaf the size of a canoe
fluttered by.
‘Stay focused,’ Blitzen told me. ‘That feeling you had when you opened the portal?
Look for it again. Find us an exit.’
After walking about a quarter of a mile, we
found a smaller branch crossing directly under ours. My sword hummed louder, tugging
to the right.
I looked at my friends. ‘I think we need to
take this exit.’
Changing branches might sound easy, but
it involved sliding down ten feet from one
curved surface to another, with the wind

541/1044

howling and the branches swaying apart.
Amazingly, we managed it without anyone
getting crushed or falling into oblivion.
Navigating the narrower branch was
worse. It bobbed more violently under our
feet. At one point I got flattened by a leaf –
like a green tarp dropping on top of me out
of nowhere. At another point I looked down
and realized I was standing over a crack in
the bark. Half a mile down, inside the
branch, I could see a snow-capped mountain
range, as if I were standing in a glass-bottom
aeroplane.
We picked our way through a maze of
lichen patches that looked like hills of
burned marshmallows. I made the mistake
of touching one. My hand sunk up to my
wrist and I almost couldn’t pull it free.
Finally the lichen dispersed into smaller
clumps like burned marshmallow sofas. We
followed our branch until it split into half a

542/1044

dozen unclimbable twigs. The Sword of Summer seemed to go to sleep in my hand.
‘Well?’ Sam asked.
I peered over the side. About thirty feet below us, a larger branch swayed. In the middle
of that branch, a hot-tub-size knothole
glowed with soft warm light.
‘That’s it,’ I said. ‘That’s our way out.’
Blitzen scowled. ‘You sure? Nidavellir isn’t
warm and glowy.’
‘I’m just telling you – the sword seems to
think that’s our destination.’
Sam whistled silently. ‘Quite a jump. If we
miss the hole …’
Hearthstone spelled out: S-P-L-A-T.
A gust of wind hit us, and Hearth
stumbled. Before I could catch him, he fell
backwards into a clump of lichen. His legs
were promptly swallowed in the marshmallow gunk.

543/1044

‘Hearth!’ Blitzen scrambled to his side. He
pulled at Hearth’s arms, but the mucky
lichen held on to his legs like a needy
toddler.
‘We can cut him out,’ said Sam. ‘Your
sword, my axe. It’ll take time. We’ll have to
be careful of his legs. But it could be worse.’
Naturally, things got worse. From somewhere above us came an explosive YARK!
Blitzen crouched under his pith helmet.
‘Ratatosk! That damnable squirrel always
appears at the worst time. Hurry with those
blades!’
Sam cut into the lichen with her axe, but
her blade stuck. ‘This is like cutting through
melting tyres! It’s not going to be quick.’
GO! Hearth signed. Leave me.
‘Not an option,’ I said.
YAAAAARRRRK! The sound was much
louder this time. A dozen branches above us,
a large shadow passed across the leaves.

544/1044

I hefted my sword. ‘We’ll fight the squirrel.
We can do that, right?’
Sam looked at me like I was mad. ‘Ratatosk is invulnerable. There is no fighting
him. Our options are running, hiding or
dying.’
‘We can’t run,’ I said. ‘And I’ve already
died twice this week.’
‘So we hide.’ Sam unwrapped her hijab. ‘At
least, Hearth and I do. I can cover two
people, no more. You and Blitz run – find the
dwarves. We’ll meet up with you later.’
‘What?’ I wondered if Utgard-Loki was
messing with her brain somehow. ‘Sam, you
can’t hide under a green piece of silk! The
squirrel can’t be that stupid …’
She shook out the fabric. It grew to the size
of a bedsheet, the colours rippling until the
hijab was exactly the same brown and yellow
and white of the lichen patch.
She’s right, Hearth signed. GO.

545/1044

Sam crouched next to him and pulled the
hijab over them both, and they vanished,
blending perfectly against the lichen.
‘Magnus.’ Blitz tugged at my arm. ‘It’s now
or never.’ He pointed to the branch below.
The knothole was closing.
At that moment, Ratatosk broke through
foliage above. If you can imagine a Sherman
tank covered in red fur, barrelling down the
side of a tree … well, the squirrel was way
scarier than that. His front teeth were twin
wedges of white enamel terror. His claws
were scimitars. His eyes were sulphur yellow,
burning with fury.
YARK! The squirrel’s battle cry pierced my
eardrums. A thousand insults were packed
into that one sound, all of them invading my
brain, drowning out any rational thought.
You have failed.
No one likes you.
You are dead.

546/1044

Your dwarf’s pith helmet is stupid.
You could not save your mother.
I fell to my knees. A sob built in my chest. I
probably would have died then and there if
Blitz hadn’t hauled me up with all his dwarven strength and slapped me across the face.
I couldn’t hear him, but I read his lips well
enough: ‘NOW, KID!’
Gripping my hand in rough calloused fingers, he jumped off the branch, dragging me
with him into the wind.

THIRTY-EIGHT

I Break Down in a
Volkswagen

I stood in a sunlit meadow with no memory
of how I got there.
In the distance, wildflowers dusted rolling
green hills. The breeze smelled of lavender.
The light was warm and rich as if the air had
turned to butter.
My thoughts moved sluggishly. Light …
sunlight was bad for dwarves. I was pretty
sure I’d been travelling with a dwarf –
someone who had slapped me and saved my
life.

549/1044

‘Blitz?’
He stood to my left, holding his pith helmet at his side.
‘Blitz, your hat!’
I was afraid he’d already become stone.
Then he turned. His eyes were stormy and
distant. ‘It’s okay, kid. This isn’t regular sunlight. We’re not on Midgard any more.’
He sounded like he was talking through
wax paper. The squirrel’s yap had left a
crackling in my ears and some corrosive
thoughts rattling around in my brain.
‘Ratatosk …’ I couldn’t finish the sentence.
Just saying his name made me want to curl
up in the foetal position.
‘Yeah,’ Blitz said. ‘His bark is literally
worse than his bite. He …’ Blitz looked down,
blinking rapidly. ‘He’s the most destructive
creature in the World Tree. He spends his
time running up and down the trunk, carrying insults from the eagle who lives at the top

550/1044

to Nidhogg, the dragon who lives at the
roots.’
I gazed towards the hills. Faint sounds of
music seemed to be coming from that direction, or maybe it was the static in my ears.
‘Why would a squirrel do that?’
‘To damage the tree,’ Blitz said. ‘Ratatosk
keeps the eagle and the dragon whipped into
a frenzy. He tells them lies, rumours, nasty
gossip about each other. His words can …
well, you know what his words can do. The
dragon Nidhogg is always chewing on the
roots of the World Tree, trying to kill it. The
eagle flaps his wings and creates windstorms
that rip the branches and cause devastation
throughout the Nine Worlds. Ratatosk
makes sure the two monsters stay angry and
in competition with each other, to see which
one can destroy their end of Yggdrasil faster.’
‘But that’s … crazy. The squirrel lives in
the tree.’

551/1044

Blitz grimaced. ‘We all do, kid. People have
destructive impulses. Some of us want to see
the world in ruins just for the fun of it …
even if we’re ruined along with it.’
Ratatosk’s chatter echoed in my head: You
have failed. You could not save your mother.
The squirrel had driven me to despair, but I
could see how his bark might stir up other
emotions – hatred, bitterness, self-loathing.
‘How did you keep your wits?’ I asked Blitz. ‘When the squirrel barked, what did you
hear?’
Blitz ran his fingers across the brim of his
pith helmet, pinching the edge of the black
veil. ‘Nothing I don’t tell myself all the time,
kid. We should get going.’
He trudged off towards the hills. Despite
his short stride, I had to power-walk to keep
up.
We crossed a stream where a picturesque
little frog sat on a lily pad. Doves and falcons

552/1044

spiralled through the air like they were playing tag. I half expected a chorus line of fuzzy
animals to pop out of the wildflowers and
launch into a Disney musical number.
‘I’m guessing this is not Nidavellir,’ I said
as we climbed the hill.
Blitzen snorted. ‘No. Much worse.’
‘Alfheim?’
‘Worse.’ Blitzen stopped just short of the
crest and took a deep breath. ‘Come on. Let’s
get this over with.’
At the top of the hill I froze. ‘Whoa.’
Down the other side, green fields stretched
to the horizon. Meadows were strewn with
picnic blankets. Crowds of people were
hanging out – eating, laughing, chatting,
playing music, flying kites, tossing beach
balls. It was the world’s largest, most laidback outdoor concert, minus the concert.
Some folks were dressed in various bits of

553/1044

armour. Most had weapons, but they didn’t
seem very interested in using them.
In the shade of an oak tree, a couple of
young ladies were sword fighting, but after
crossing blades a few times they got bored,
dropped their weapons and started chatting.
Another guy lounged in a lawn chair, flirting
with the girl on his left while he casually parried attacks from the guy standing on his
right.
Blitz pointed to the crest of the next hill
about half a mile away, where a strange
palace gleamed. It looked like an upsidedown Noah’s Ark made of gold and silver.
‘Sessrumnir,’ said Blitzen. ‘The Hall of
Many Seats. If we’re lucky, maybe she won’t
be home.’
‘Who?’
Instead of answering, he waded into the
crowd.

554/1044

We hadn’t gone twenty feet before a guy
on a nearby picnic blanket called, ‘Hey, Blitzen! What’s up, dude?’
Blitzen ground his teeth so hard I could
hear them popping. ‘Hello, Miles.’
‘Yeah, I’m good!’ Miles raised his sword
absently as another guy in beach trunks and
a vest charged towards him with a battleaxe.
The attacker screamed, ‘DIE! Ha, ha, just
kidding.’ Then he walked away eating a
chocolate bar.
‘So, Blitz,’ Miles said, ‘what brings you to
Casa de Awesome?’
‘Nice seeing you, Miles.’ Blitzen grabbed
my arm and led me onward.
‘Okay, cool!’ Miles called after us. ‘Keep in
touch!’
‘Who was that?’ I asked.
‘Nobody.’
‘How do you know him?’
‘I don’t.’

555/1044

As we made our way towards the upsidedown ark mansion, more people stopped and
said hello to Blitzen. A few greeted me and
complimented me on my sword, or my hair,
or my shoes. One girl said, ‘Oh, nice ears!’
Which didn’t even make sense.
‘Everybody is so –’
‘Stupid?’ Blitzen offered.
‘I was going to say mellow.’
He grunted. ‘This is Folkvanger, the Field
of the Army … or you could translate it as the
People’s Battlefield.’
‘So this is Volkswagen.’ I scanned the
crowds, wondering if I would spot my mother, but I couldn’t imagine her in a place like
this. There was too much lounging around,
not enough action. My mom would’ve rousted these warriors to their feet, led them on a
ten-mile hike, then insisted they set up their
own campsites if they wanted any dinner.
‘They don’t seem like much of an army.’

556/1044

‘Yeah, well,’ Blitz said, ‘these fallen are just
as powerful as the einherjar, but they have a
different attitude. This realm is one little
subsection of Vanaheim – sort of the Vanir
gods’ flipside version of Valhalla.’
I tried to picture myself spending eternity
here. Valhalla had its good points, but as far
as I’d seen it didn’t have picnics or beach
balls, and I definitely wouldn’t describe it as
mellow. Still … I wasn’t sure I liked Folkvanger any better.
‘So half the worthy dead go here,’ I remembered, ‘half go to Valhalla. How do they
pick who goes where? Is it a coin toss?’
‘That would make more sense, actually.’
‘But I was trying to get us to Nidavellir.
Why did we come here?’
Blitzen stared at the mansion atop the hill.
‘You were looking for the path we needed for
our quest. That path led us through Folkvanger. Unfortunately, I think I know why.

557/1044

Let’s go pay our respects before I lose my
nerve.’
As we approached the gates, I realized
Sessrumnir wasn’t just built to look like an
upside-down ship. It actually was an upsidedown ship. The rows of tall windows were
oar slots. The sloping walls of the hull were
made from clinkered gold planks riveted
with silver nails. The main entrance had a
long awning that would’ve served as a
gangplank.
‘Why is it a boat?’ I asked.
‘What?’ Blitzen fiddled nervously with his
carnation. ‘Not so unusual. Your Norse ancestors made lots of buildings by turning
their ships upside down. In the case of Sessrumnir, when the Day of Doom comes
around, they’ll just flip the palace over and
voilà, it’s a vessel big enough for all the warriors of Folkvanger to sail nobly to their
deaths. Sort of like we’re doing now.’

558/1044

He led me inside.
I’d been expecting a gloomy interior like
the hold of a ship, but the Hall of Many Seats
was more like a cathedral. The ceiling rose
all the way to the keel. The oar-hole windows
crosshatched the air with bars of light. The
entire space was open, no separate rooms or
partitions – just clusters of sofas, comfy
chairs, throw pillows and freestanding hammocks, most of which were occupied by
snoring warriors. I hoped the half million inhabitants of Folkvanger liked one another’s
company, because there was no privacy. Me
being me, the main thing I wondered was
where they all went to the bathroom.
Down the centre of the hall ran an aisle of
Persian carpets, flanked by braziers with
glowing spheres of gold light. At the far end
stood a throne on a raised dais.

559/1044

Blitz marched in that direction, ignoring
the warriors who greeted him with ‘Dude!’
and ‘Sup, Dwarf Man!’ and ‘Welcome home!’
Welcome home?
In front of the dais, a cosy fire crackled in
the hearth. Piles of jewellery and precious
gems glittered here and there as if somebody
had swept them up just to get them off the
floor. On either side of the steps lounged a
calico house cat the size of a sabre-toothed
tiger.
The throne was carved from wood as soft
and buttery as the light – linden wood,
maybe. The back was draped with a cloak of
downy feathers like on the underside of a falcon. In the throne itself sat the most beautiful woman I’d ever seen.
She looked maybe twenty years old, surrounded by an aura of golden radiance that
made me realize what Blitzen meant earlier
when he’d said the daylight here wasn’t

560/1044

normal. The entire realm of Folkvanger was
warm and bright, not because of the sun, but
because it basked in this woman’s power.
Her blonde hair fell across one shoulder in
a single long plait. Her white halter top
showed off her tanned shoulders and smooth
midriff. Her knee-length skirt was belted
with a gold braid holding a sheathed knife
and a ring of keys. Around her neck was a
dazzling piece of jewellery – a lacework collar of gold and gems, like Ran’s net in miniature, except with rubies and diamonds instead of sailors’ souls and hubcaps.
The woman fixed me with her sky-blue
eyes. When she smiled, heat travelled from
the tips of my ears right down to my toes. I
would have done anything to make her keep
smiling at me. If she’d told me to jump off
the World Tree into oblivion, I would’ve
done it in a second.

561/1044

I remembered her picture from my old
children’s mythology book and realized how
ridiculously it undersold her beauty.
The goddess of love was very pretty! She
had cats!
I knelt before my aunt, the twin sister of
my father. ‘Freya.’
‘My dear Magnus,’ she said, ‘how nice to
meet you in person!’ She turned to Blitzen,
who was glowering at his boots.
‘And how are you, Blitzen?’ asked the
goddess.
Blitzen sighed. ‘I’m fine, Mom.’

THIRTY-NINE

Freya Is Pretty! She Has
Cats!

‘Mom?’ I was so startled I wasn’t sure I’d
said it aloud. ‘Wait … You, Blitzen. Mom?’
Blitzen kicked me in the shin.
Freya continued smiling. ‘I suppose my
son didn’t tell you? He’s quite modest. Blitzen dear, you look very nice, but could you
straighten your collar?’
Blitzen did, muttering under his breath,
‘Been a little busy running for my life.’
‘And, dear,’ Freya said, ‘are you sure about
the waistcoat?’

564/1044

‘Yes, Mom,’ Blitz grumbled, ‘I’m sure
about the waistcoat. Waistcoats are making a
comeback.’
‘Well, I suppose you know best.’ Freya
winked at me. ‘Blitzen is a genius with fabrics and fashion. The other dwarves don’t appreciate his expertise, but I think it’s marvellous. He wants to open his own –’
‘Anyway,’ Blitzen said, a little too loudly,
‘we’re on this quest …’
Freya clapped. ‘I know! It’s very exciting.
You’re trying to get to Nidavellir to find out
more about the rope Gleipnir. And so, naturally, the World Tree directed you first to me.’
One of her cats clawed at a Persian rug,
ripping several thousand dollars of weaving
into fluff. I tried not to imagine what the cat
could do to me.
‘So, Lady Freya,’ I said, ‘can you help us?’
‘Of course!’ said the goddess. ‘More importantly, you can help me.’

565/1044

‘Here we go,’ said Blitzen.
‘Son, be polite. First, Magnus, how are you
faring with your sword?’
I missed a beat.
I guess I still didn’t think of the Sword of
Summer as mine. I pulled off the pendant
and the blade took shape in my hand. In
Freya’s presence, it was silent and still like it
was playing dead. Maybe it was afraid of
cats.
‘I haven’t had much time to use it,’ I said.
‘Just got it back from Ran.’
‘Yes, I know.’ Freya’s nose wrinkled with
the slightest hint of distaste. ‘And you delivered an apple to Utgard-Loki in exchange.
Perhaps not the wisest move, but I won’t criticize your choices.’
‘You just did,’ Blitzen said.
The goddess ignored his comment. ‘At
least you didn’t promise me to Utgard-Loki.
Usually when giants make demands, they

566/1044

want apples and my hand in marriage.’ She
flipped her braid over her shoulder. ‘It gets
very tiresome.’
I had a hard time looking at Freya without
staring. There really wasn’t anything safe to
focus on – her eyes, her lips, her belly button. I silently scolded myself, This is Blitzen’s
mom! This is my aunt!
I decided to focus on her left eyebrow.
There was nothing entrancing about a left
eyebrow.
‘So anyway,’ I said, ‘I haven’t really killed
anything yet with the eyebrow – I mean the
sword.’
Freya sat forward. ‘Killed anything with it?
Oh, dear, that’s the least of its powers. Your
first task is to befriend the sword. Have you
done this?’
I imagined the sword and me sitting side
by side in a movie theatre, a tub of popcorn
between us. I imagined dragging the sword

567/1044

on a leash, taking it for a walk through the
park. ‘How do I befriend a sword?’
‘Ah … well, if you have to ask –’
‘Look, Aunt Freya,’ I said, ‘couldn’t I just
give the sword to you for safekeeping? It’s a
Vanir weapon. You’re Frey’s sister. You’ve
got a few hundred thousand well-armed,
laid-back warriors to guard it from Surt –’
‘Oh, no,’ she said sadly. ‘The sword is
already in your hands, Magnus. You
summoned it from the river. You have laid
claim to it. The best we can hope for is that
Sumarbrander, the Sword of Summer, will
allow you to use it. Keeping it from Surt is
your job now, as long as you manage to stay
alive.’
‘I hate my job.’
Blitz elbowed me. ‘Don’t say that, kid.
You’ll offend the blade.’
I looked down at the gleaming runes on
the blade. ‘I’m sorry, long sharp piece of

568/1044

metal. Did that hurt your feelings? Also, if
you allow people to wield you, why would
you allow an evil fire giant to do so? Why
wouldn’t you want to go back to Frey, or at
least his lovely sister here?’
The sword did not reply.
‘Magnus,’ said the goddess, ‘this is no jesting matter. The sword is fated to belong to
Surt, sooner or later. You know this. The
sword cannot escape its destiny any more
than you can escape yours.’
I envisioned Loki chuckling as he lounged
on the High Seat of Odin. Our choices can
alter the details. That’s how we rebel
against destiny.
‘Besides,’ Freya said, ‘the sword would
never allow me to use it. Sumarbrander
holds me partially responsible for its loss …
It resents me almost as much as it resents
Frey.’

569/1044

Maybe it was my imagination, but the
sword seemed to become colder and heavier.
‘But it’s Frey’s sword,’ I protested.
Blitzen grunted. ‘It was. I told you, kid, he
gave it away for love.’
The calico cat on Freya’s right rolled over
and stretched. Its spotted tummy was pretty
cute, except for the fact that I kept imagining
how many warriors it could comfortably
digest.
‘When Frey sat on Odin’s throne,’ continued the goddess, ‘he did so for my sake. It
was a dark time for me. I was wandering the
Nine Worlds, grieving and bereft. Frey hoped
that by sitting in the throne he might find
me. Instead, the throne showed him his
heart’s desire – a frost giantess, Gerd. He fell
madly in love with her.’
I stared at Freya’s eyebrow. Her story
wasn’t helping my opinion of my dad.

570/1044

‘He fell in love at first sight … with a frost
giantess.’
‘Oh, she was beautiful,’ Freya said. ‘Silver
to Frey’s gold, cold to his warmth, winter to
his summer. You’ve heard that opposites attract? She was his perfect match. But she was
a giant. She would never agree to marry a
Vanir. Her family would not allow it. Knowing this, Frey fell into despair. Crops stopped
growing. Summer lost its warmth. Finally,
Frey’s servant and best friend came to ask
him what was wrong.’
‘Skirnir,’ I said. ‘The dude who got the
sword.’
Freya frowned. ‘Yes. Him.’
Blitzen took a step back, like he was afraid
his mom might explode. For the first time, I
realized how scary the goddess could look –
beautiful, yes, but also terrifying and powerful. I imagined her armed with a shield and
spear, riding with the Valkyries. If I saw her

571/1044

on the battlefield, I would run in the other
direction.
‘Skirnir promised he could deliver Gerd
within nine days,’ said the goddess. ‘All he
required was a small fee for his services – the
Sword of Summer. Frey was so love-stricken
that he asked no questions. The sword … I
can only imagine how it felt when it was betrayed by its master. It allowed Skirnir to
wield it, though not happily.’
Freya sighed. ‘That is why the sword will
never allow Frey to use it again. And that is
why, at Ragnarok, Frey is fated to die because he does not have his weapon.’
I wasn’t sure what to say. Bummer didn’t
seem to cover it. I remembered Loki’s warning about sitting on Odin’s throne, looking
for my heart’s desire. What would I look for?
My mother’s whereabouts. Would I give up a
sword to find her? Of course. Would I risk

572/1044

getting killed or even hastening Doomsday?
Yes. So maybe I couldn’t judge my father.
Blitz gripped my arm. ‘Don’t look so glum,
kid. I have faith in you.’
Freya’s expression softened. ‘Yes, Magnus.
You will learn to use the sword – and I don’t
mean just swinging it like a brute. Once you
discover its full abilities, you will be formidable indeed.’
‘I don’t suppose it comes with a user’s
manual?’
Freya laughed gently. ‘I’m sorry I didn’t
get you in Folkvanger, Magnus. You would’ve
been a good addition to my followers. But
Valhalla called you first. It was meant to be.’
I wanted to argue that the Norns, the einherjar and the captain of the Valkyries didn’t
seem to think so.
Thinking about Gunilla made me remember our flight into the World Tree, and Sam
and Hearthstone hiding under a veil from a

573/1044

murderous squirrel. ‘Our friends … we got
separated from them on Yggdrasil. Freya, do
you know if they made it here safely?’
Freya peered into the distance. ‘They are
not in Folkvanger. I see them … Yes. Wait.
Lost them again. Ah!’ She winced. ‘That was
a close call, but they’re fine for the moment.
A resourceful pair. I sense they will not come
here. You must continue on and meet them
in Nidavellir. Which brings us to your quest.’
‘And how we can help you,’ Blitz said.
‘Exactly, darling. Your need brought you
here. Need speaks strongly when you travel
the World Tree. After all, that’s how my poor
son found himself being a bondservant to
Mimir.’
‘We’re not having this discussion again,’
Blitz said.
Freya turned over her lovely hands. ‘Fine.
Moving along. As you well know, the

574/1044

dwarves created the rope Gleipnir, which
bound Fenris Wolf …’
‘Yes, Mom,’ Blitz said, rolling his eyes.
‘Everyone learns that nursery rhyme in
kindergarten.’
I squinted at him. ‘Nursery rhyme?’
‘Gleipnir, Gleipnir, strong and stout,
wrapped the Wolf around the snout. Humans don’t learn that one?’
‘Um … I don’t think so.’
‘At any rate,’ said the goddess, ‘the
dwarves will be able to tell you more about
how the rope was made and how it might be
replaced.’
‘Replaced?’ I willed the sword back into
pendant form. Even so, hanging around my
neck, it seemed to weigh a hundred pounds.
‘I thought the idea was to keep the rope from
getting cut in the first place.’
‘Ah …’ Freya tapped her lips. ‘Magnus, I
don’t want to discourage you, but I’d say

575/1044

there is a good chance, perhaps a seventyfive per cent chance, that even if you keep
the sword from Surt the fire giant will still
find a way to free Fenris Wolf. In such a case,
you must be prepared with a replacement
rope.’
My tongue felt almost as heavy as my
sword pendant. ‘Yeah, that’s not at all discouraging. The last time the Wolf was free,
didn’t it take all the gods working together to
bind him?’
Freya nodded. ‘It took three tries and
much trickery. Poor Tyr lost his hand. But
don’t worry. The Wolf will never fall for the
hand-in-the-mouth trick again. If it comes to
that, you will have to find another way to
bind him.’
I bet Miles out in the People’s Battlefield
didn’t have these sorts of problems. I
wondered if he’d be interested in trading
places for a while, going after Fenris Wolf

576/1044

while I played volleyball. ‘Freya, can you at
least tell us where the Wolf is?’
‘On Lyngvi – the Isle of Heather.’ The goddess tapped her chin. ‘Let’s see, today is
Thor’s Day the sixteenth.’
‘You mean Thursday?’
‘That’s what I said. The island will rise on
the full moon six days from now, on the
twenty-second, which is Woden’s Day.’
‘Wednesday?’ I asked.
‘That’s what I said. So you should have
plenty of time to get my earrings before you
seek out the Wolf. Unfortunately, the island’s
location shifts every year as the branches of
Yggdrasil sway in the winds of the void. The
dwarves should be able to help you locate it.
Blitzen’s father knew the way. Others might
as well.’
At the mention of his father, Blitz’s face
clouded over. Very carefully, he took the
carnation from his waistcoat and tossed it

577/1044

into the hearth fire. ‘And what do you want,
Mother? What’s your part in this?’
‘Oh, my needs are simple.’ Her fingers
fluttered over her golden lace collar. ‘I want
you to commission some earrings to match
my necklace Brisingamen. Something nice.
Not too flashy, but noticeable. Blitzen, you
have excellent taste. I trust you.’
Blitzen glared at the nearest pile of riches,
which contained dozens, maybe hundreds of
earrings. ‘You know who I have to talk to in
Nidavellir. Only one dwarf has the skill to replace the rope Gleipnir.’
‘Yes,’ Freya agreed. ‘Fortunately, he’s also
an excellent jeweller, so he will be able to accommodate both our requests.’
‘Unfortunately,’ said Blitzen, ‘this particular dwarf wants me dead.’
Freya waved aside his objection. ‘Oh, he
can’t possibly. Not after all this time.’

578/1044

‘Dwarves have very long memories,
Mother.’
‘Well, generous payment will soften his attitude. I can help with that.’ She called across
the hall, ‘Dmitri? I need you!’
From one of the sofa clusters, three guys
scrambled to their feet, grabbed their musical instruments and hustled over. They wore
matching Hawaiian shirts, Bermuda shorts
and sandals. Their hair was greased back in
pompadours. The first guy had a guitar. The
second had bongos. The third had a triangle.
The guy with the guitar bowed to Freya.
‘At your service, my lady!’
Freya gave me a conspiratorial smile, as if
she had some wonderful secret to share.
‘Magnus, meet Dmitri and the Do-Runs, the
best band you’ve never heard of. They died in
1963, just as they were about to get their big
break. So sad! They valiantly swerved their
car off Route One to spare a busload of

579/1044

schoolchildren from a terrible collision. In
honour of their selfless deaths, I brought
them here to Folkvanger.’
‘And we’re very grateful, my lady,’ said
Dmitri. ‘Being your house band has been a
sweet gig!’
‘Dmitri, I need to cry,’ she said. ‘Could you
please play the one about my lost husband? I
love that song.’
‘I hate that song,’ Blitzen mumbled under
his breath.
The trio hummed. Dmitri strummed a
chord.
I whispered to Blitzen, ‘Why does your
mom need to cry?’
He turned towards me and made a fingerdown-the-throat gesture. ‘Just watch. You’ll
see.’
Dmitri began to sing:
‘Oh, Odur! Od, Od, Odur,
Where is that Odur; where is my love?’

580/1044

The other two musicians harmonized on
the chorus:
‘Od wanders far, my Odur is missing,
How odd it is, not to be kissing
My Odur! My sweet Od, Odur!’

Triangle.
Bongo solo.
Blitzen whispered, ‘Her godly husband
was an Aesir named Odur, Od for short.’
I wasn’t sure which name was worse.
‘He disappeared?’ I guessed.
‘Two thousand years ago,’ Blitzen said.
‘Freya went looking for him, disappeared
herself for almost a century while she
searched. She never found him, but that’s
why Frey sat in Odin’s chair in the first place
– to look for his sister.’
The goddess leaned forward and cupped
her face in her hands. She drew a shaky
breath. When she looked up again, she was

581/1044

weeping – but her tears were small pellets of
red gold. She wept until her hands were full
of glittering droplets.
‘Oh, Odur!’ she sobbed. ‘Why did you leave
me? I miss you still!’
She sniffled and nodded to the musicians.
‘Thank you, Dmitri. That’s enough.’
Dmitri and his friends bowed. Then the
best band I wished I’d never heard of
shuffled away.
Freya raised her cupped hands. Out of
nowhere, a leather pouch appeared, hovering
above her lap. Freya spilled her tears into the
bag.
‘Here, my son.’ Freya passed the pouch to
Blitzen. ‘That should be enough payment if
Eitri Junior is at all reasonable.’
Blitzen stared glumly at the pouch of tears.
‘The only problem is, he’s not.’
‘You will succeed!’ Freya said. ‘The fate of
my earrings is in your hands!’

582/1044

I scratched the back of my neck. ‘Uh, Lady
Freya … thanks for the tears and all, but
couldn’t you just go to Nidavellir and pick
out your own earrings? I mean, isn’t shopping half the fun?’
Blitzen shot me a warning look.
Freya’s blue eyes turned a few degrees
colder. Her fingertips traced the filigree of
her necklace. ‘No, Magnus, I can’t just go
shopping in Nidavellir. You know what
happened when I bought Brisingamen from
the dwarves. Do you want that to happen
again?’
Actually, I had no idea what she was talking about, but she didn’t wait for an answer.
‘Every time I go to Nidavellir, I get myself
in trouble,’ she said. ‘It’s not my fault! The
dwarves know my weakness for beautiful
jewellery. Believe me, it’s much better that I
send you. Now, if you’ll excuse me, it’s time
for our evening luau with optional combat.

583/1044

Goodbye, Magnus. Goodbye, my darling
Blitzen!’
The floor opened beneath us, and we fell
into darkness.

FORTY

My Friend Evolved from
a – Nope. I Can’t Say It

I don’t remember landing.
I found myself on a dark street on a cold,
cloudy night. Three-storey terraced clapboard houses edged the sidewalk. At the end
of the block, a tavern’s grimy windows
glowed with neon drink signs.
‘This is Southie,’ I said. ‘Around D Street.’
Blitzen shook his head. ‘This is Nidavellir,
kid. It looks like South Boston … or rather,
South Boston looks like it. I told you, Boston
is the nexus. The Nine Worlds blend together

586/1044

there and affect one another. Southie has a
definite dwarvish feeling to it.’
‘I thought Nidavellir would be underground. With claustrophobic tunnels and –’
‘Kid, that’s a cavern ceiling above your
head. It’s just a long way up and hidden by
air pollution. We don’t have daytime here.
It’s this dark all the time.’
I stared into the murky clouds. After being
in Freya’s realm, the world of the dwarves
seemed oppressive, but it also seemed more
familiar, more … genuine. I guess no true Bostonian would trust a place that was sunny
and pleasant all the time. But a gritty, perpetually cold and gloomy neighbourhood?
Throw in a couple of Dunkin’ Donuts locations, and I’m right at home.
Blitz wrapped his pith helmet in its dark
netting. The whole thing collapsed into a
small black handkerchief, which he tucked
into his coat pocket. ‘We should get going.’

587/1044

‘We’re not going to talk about what
happened up there in Volkswagen?’
‘What’s there to say?’
‘For one thing, we’re cousins.’
Blitz shrugged. ‘I’m happy to be your cousin, kid, but children of the gods don’t put
much stock in that sort of connection. Godly
family lines are so tangled – thinking about
it will drive you crazy. Everybody’s related to
everybody.’
‘But you’re a demigod,’ I said. ‘That’s a
good thing, right?’
‘I hate the word demigod. I prefer born
with a target on my back.’
‘Come on, Blitz. Freya is your mom. That’s
important information you kinda forgot to
mention.’
‘Freya is my mother,’ he agreed. ‘A lot of
svartalfs are descended from Freya. Down
here, it’s not such a big deal. She mentioned
how she got Brisingamen? A few millennia

588/1044

ago she was strolling through Nidavellir –
who knows why – and she came across these
four dwarves who were crafting the necklace.
She was obsessed. She had to have it. The
dwarves said sure, for the right price. Freya
had to marry each of them, one after the other, for one day each.’
‘She …’ I wanted to say, Gross, she married four dwarves? Then I remembered who
was telling the story. ‘Oh.’
‘Yeah.’ Blitz sounded miserable. ‘She had
four dwarvish children, one for each
marriage.’
I frowned. ‘Wait. If she was married for
one day to each dwarf and a pregnancy lasts
… the maths doesn’t work out on that.’
‘Don’t ask me. Goddesses live by their own
rules. Anyway, she got the necklace. She was
ashamed of herself for marrying dwarves.
Tried to keep it a secret. But the thing is, she
loved dwarven jewellery. She kept coming

589/1044

back to Nidavellir to pick out new pieces, and
every time …’
‘Wow.’
Blitzen’s shoulders slumped. ‘That’s the
main difference between dark elves and regular dwarves. The svartalfs are taller and
generally more handsome because we have
Vanir blood. We’re descended from Freya.
You say I’m a demigod. I say I’m a receipt.
My dad crafted a pair of earrings for Freya.
She married him for a day. She couldn’t resist his craftsmanship. He couldn’t resist her
beauty. Now she sends me to purchase a new
pair of earrings because she’s tired of the old
ones and Asgard forbid she find herself
saddled with another little Blitzen.’
The bitterness in his voice could’ve melted
iron plating. I wanted to tell him I understood how he felt, but I wasn’t sure I did.
Even if I never knew my dad, I’d had my
mom. That had always been enough for me.

590/1044

For Blitzen … not so much. I wasn’t sure
what had happened to his father, but I remembered what he’d told me at the Esplanade lagoon: You’re not the only one
who’s lost family to the wolves, kid.
‘Come on,’ he told me. ‘If we stand in the
street any longer, we’ll get mugged for this
bag of tears. Dwarves can smell red gold a
mile away.’ He pointed to the bar on the
corner. ‘I’ll buy you a drink at Nabbi’s
Tavern.’
Nabbi’s restored my faith in dwarves, because it was in fact a claustrophobic tunnel.
The ceiling was a low-clearance hazard. The
walls were papered with old fight posters like
DONNER THE DESTROYER VS. MINI-MURDERER, ONE
NIGHT ONLY! featuring pictures of muscular,

snarling dwarves in wrestling masks.
Mismatched tables and chairs were occupied by a dozen mismatched dwarves – some

591/1044

svartalfs like Blitzen who could easily have
passed for human, some much shorter guys
who could have easily passed for garden
gnomes. A few of the patrons glanced at us,
but nobody seemed shocked that I was a human … if they even realized. The idea that I
could pass for a dwarf was pretty disturbing.
The most unreal thing about the bar was
Taylor Swift’s ‘Blank Space’ blasting from the
speakers.
‘Dwarves like human music?’ I asked
Blitzen.
‘You mean humans like our music.’
‘But …’ I had a sudden image of Taylor
Swift’s mom and Freya having a girls’ night
out in Nidavellir. ‘Never mind.’
As we made our way towards the bar, I
realized that the furniture wasn’t just mismatched. Every single table and chair was
unique – apparently handcrafted from various metals, with different designs and

592/1044

upholstery. One table was shaped like a
bronze wagon wheel with a glass top. Another had a tin and brass chessboard hammered
into the surface. Some chairs had wheels.
Others had adjustable booster seats. Some
had massage controls or propellers on the
back.
Over by the left wall, three dwarves were
playing darts. The board’s rings rotated and
blew steam. One dwarf tossed his dart, which
buzzed towards the target like a tiny drone.
While it was still in flight, another dwarf
took a shot. His dart rocketed towards the
drone dart and exploded, knocking it out of
the air.
The first dwarf just grunted. ‘Nice shot.’
Finally we reached the polished oak bar,
where Nabbi himself was waiting. I could tell
who he was because of my highly trained deductive mind, and also because his stained
yellow apron read: HI! I’M NABBI.

593/1044

I thought he was the tallest dwarf I’d met
so far until I realized he was standing on a
catwalk behind the counter. Nabbi was actually only two feet tall, including the shock of
black hair that stuck up from his scalp like a
sea urchin. His clean-shaven face made me
appreciate why dwarves wear beards.
Without one, Nabbi was gods-awful ugly. He
had no chin to speak of. His mouth puckered
sourly.
He scowled at us like we’d tracked in mud.
‘Greetings, Blitzen, son of Freya,’ he said.
‘No explosions in my bar this time, I hope?’
Blitzen bowed. ‘Greetings, Nabbi, son of
Loretta. To be fair, I wasn’t the one who
brought the grenades. Also, this is my friend
Magnus, son of –’
‘Um. Son of Natalie.’
Nabbi nodded to me. His busy eyebrows
were fascinating. They seemed to move like
live caterpillars.

594/1044

I reached for a bar stool, but Blitzen
stopped me.
‘Nabbi,’ he said formally, ‘may my friend
use this stool? What is its name and history?’
‘That stool is Rear-Rester,’ said Nabbi.
‘Crafted by Gonda. Once it held the tush of
the master smith Alviss. Use it in comfort,
Magnus, son of Natalie. And, Blitzen, you
may sit on Keister-Home, famed among
stools, made by yours truly. It survived the
Great Bar Fight of 4109 A.M.!’
‘My thanks.’ Blitzen climbed onto his stool,
which was polished oak with a velvet-padded
seat. ‘A fine Keister-Home it is!’
Nabbi looked at me expectantly. I tried my
stool, which was hard steel with no cushion.
It wasn’t much of a Rear-Rester. It was more
of a Magnus-Mangler, but I tried for a smile.
‘Yep, that’s a nice stool all right!’
Blitzen rapped his knuckles on the bar.
‘Mead for me, Nabbi. And for my friend –’

595/1044

‘Uh, soda or something?’ I wasn’t sure I
wanted to be walking around Dwarven
Southie with a mead buzz.
Nabbi filled two mugs and set them in
front of us. Blitzen’s goblet was gold on the
inside, silver on the outside, decorated with
images of dancing dwarf women.
‘That cup is Golden Bowl,’ said Nabbi.
‘Made by my father, Darbi. And this one –’
he nudged my pewter tankard – ‘is Boom
Daddy, made by yours truly. Always ask for a
refill before you reach the bottom of the cup.
Otherwise –’ he splayed his fingers – ‘boom,
Daddy!’
I really hoped he was kidding, but I decided to take small sips.
Blitz drank his mead. ‘Mmm. A fine cup
for quaffing! And now that we are past the
formalities, Nabbi … we need to speak with
Junior.’

596/1044

A vein throbbed in Nabbi’s left temple. ‘Do
you have a death wish?’
Blitz reached into his pouch. He slid a
single red-gold tear across the counter. ‘This
one is for you,’ he said in a low voice. ‘Just
for making the call. Tell Junior we have
more. All we want is a chance to barter.’
After my experience with Ran, the word
barter made me even more uncomfortable
than Rear-Rester. Nabbi looked back and
forth between Blitzen and the tear, his expression vacillating between apprehension
and greed. Finally the greed won. The barkeeper snatched the drop of gold.
‘I’ll make the call. Enjoy your drinks.’ He
climbed off his catwalk and disappeared into
the kitchen.
I turned to Blitz. ‘A few questions.’
He chuckled. ‘Only a few?’
‘What does 4109 A.M. mean? Is it the time,
or –’

597/1044

‘Dwarves count years from the creation of
our species,’ Blitz said. ‘A.M. is After
Maggots.’
I decided my ears must still be defective
from Ratatosk’s barking. ‘Say what?’
‘The creation of the world … Come on, you
know the story. The gods killed the largest of
the giants, Ymir, and used his flesh to create
Midgard. Nidavellir developed under
Midgard, where maggots ate into the giant’s
dead flesh and created tunnels. Some of
those maggots evolved, with a little help
from the gods, into dwarves.’
Blitzen looked proud of this historical tidbit. I decided to do my best to erase it from
my long-term memory.
‘Different question,’ I said. ‘Why does my
goblet have a name?’
‘Dwarves are craftsmen,’ said Blitzen.
‘We’re serious about the things we make.
You humans – you make a thousand crappy

598/1044

chairs that all look alike and all break within
a year. When we make a chair, we make one
chair to last a lifetime, a chair unlike any
other in the world. Cups, furniture, weapons
… every crafted item has a soul and a name.
You can’t appreciate something unless it’s
good enough for a name.’
I studied my tankard, which was painstakingly engraved with runes and wave designs.
I wished it had a different name – like No
Way Will I Explode – but I had to admit it
was a nice cup.
‘And calling Nabbi son of Loretta?’ I asked.
‘Or me the son of Natalie?’
‘Dwarves are matriarchal. We trace our
lineage through our mothers. Again, it makes
much more sense than your patrilineal way.
After all, one can only be born from a single
biological mother. Unless you are the god
Heimdall. He had nine biological mothers.
But that’s another story.’

599/1044

Synapses melted in my brain. ‘Let’s move
along. Freya’s tears … red gold? Sam told me
that’s the currency of Asgard.’
‘Yes. But Freya’s tears are one hundred per
cent pure. The finest red gold in creation.
For the pouch of tears we’re carrying, most
dwarves would give their right eyeballs.’
‘So this guy Junior – he’ll bargain with
us?’
‘Either that,’ Blitz said, ‘or he’ll chop us into small pieces. You want some nachos while
we wait?’

FORTY-ONE

Blitz Makes a Bad Deal

I had to hand it to Nabbi. He served good
near-death nachos.
I was halfway through my plate of
guacamole-enhanced tastiness when Junior
showed up. On first sight, I wondered if it
would be faster just to drain Boom Daddy
and go boom, because I didn’t like our
chances of bartering with the old dwarf.
Junior looked about two hundred years
old. Scraps of grey hair clung to his liverspotted head. His beard gave scraggly a bad
name. His malicious brown eyes flitted
around the bar as if he were thinking, I hate

602/1044

that. I hate that. And I really hate that. He
wasn’t physically intimidating, shuffling
along with his gold-plated walker, but he was
flanked by a pair of dwarven bodyguards,
each so burly that they could’ve been used as
NFL tackle dummies.
The other customers got up and quietly
left, like in a scene from an old Western. Blitzen and I both stood.
‘Junior.’ Blitz bowed. ‘Thank you for meeting with us.’
‘Some nerve,’ Junior snarled.
‘Would you like my seat?’ Blitzen offered.
‘It is Keister-Home, made by –’
‘No, thanks,’ Junior said. ‘I’ll stand, compliments of my walker, Granny Shuffler,
famous among geriatric products, made by
Nurse Bambi, my private assistant.’
I bit the inside of my cheek. I doubted that
laughing would be good diplomacy.

603/1044

‘This is Magnus, son of Natalie,’ Blitzen
said.
The old dwarf glared at me. ‘I know who
he is. Found the Sword of Summer. You
couldn’t wait until after I died? I’m too old
for this Ragnarok nonsense.’
‘My bad,’ I said. ‘I should have checked
with you before I got attacked by Surt and
sent to Valhalla.’
Blitzen coughed. The bodyguards appraised me like I might have just made their
day more interesting.
Junior cackled. ‘I like you. You’re rude.
Let’s see this blade, then.’
I showed him my magic-pendant trick. In
the dim neon lights of the bar, the blade’s
runes glowed orange and green.
The old dwarf sucked his teeth. ‘That’s
Frey’s blade, all right. Bad news.’
‘Then, perhaps,’ Blitzen said, ‘you’ll be
willing to help us?’

604/1044

‘Help you?’ Junior wheezed. ‘Your father
was my nemesis! You besmirched my reputation. And you want my help. You’ve got iron
guts, Blitzen, I’ll give you that.’
The tendons in Blitz’s neck looked like
they might bust his well-starched collar.
‘This isn’t about our family feud, Junior. This
is about the rope. It’s about securing Fenris
Wolf.’
‘Oh, of course it is.’ Junior sneered at his
bodyguards. ‘The fact that my father, Eitri
Senior, was the only dwarf talented enough
to make Gleipnir, and your father, Bilì, spent
his life questioning the quality of the rope –
that has nothing to do with it!’
Blitzen clenched his pouch of red-gold
tears. I was afraid he might smack Junior
upside the head with it. ‘The Sword of Summer is right here. In just six Midgardian
nights, Surt is planning to free the Wolf.
We’re going to do our best to stop him, but

605/1044

you know the rope Gleipnir is beyond its expiration date. We need information about
the Wolf’s bindings. More importantly, we
need a replacement rope just in case. Only
you have the talent to make one.’
Junior cupped his ear. ‘Say that last part
again.’
‘You’re talented, you crusty old –’ Blitzen
stopped. ‘Only you have the skill to make a
new rope.’
‘True.’ Junior smirked. ‘It so happens I
have a replacement rope already made. Not
because of any problems with Gleipnir, mind
you, or because of any of your family’s scandalous accusations about its quality – just
because I like to be prepared. Unlike your
father, I might add, going off alone to check
on Fenris Wolf like an idiot and getting himself killed.’
I had to step in front of Blitzen to keep him
from attacking the old dwarf.

606/1044

‘Okay, then!’ I said. ‘Guys, this isn’t the
time. Junior, if you’ve got a new rope, that’s
great. Let’s talk price. And, um, we’ll also
need a nice set of earrings.’
‘Heh.’ Junior wiped his mouth. ‘Of course
you will. For Blitzen’s mother, no doubt.
What are you offering in payment?’
‘Blitzen,’ I said, ‘show him.’
Blitz’s eyes still danced with rage, but he
opened the pouch and spilled some red-gold
tears into his palm.
‘Huh,’ said Junior. ‘An acceptable price …
or it would be, if it wasn’t from Blitzen. I’ll
sell you what you want for that pouch of
tears, but first my family’s honour must be
satisfied. It’s high time we settled this feud.
What do you say, son of Freya? A contest –
you and me. The traditional rules, the traditional wager.’
Blitzen backed into the bar. He squirmed
so badly I could almost believe he had

607/1044

evolved from maggots. (ERASE. Bad, longterm memory. ERASE!)
‘Junior,’ he said, ‘you know I don’t – I
couldn’t possibly –’
‘Shall we say tomorrow at mossglow?’
Junior asked. ‘The panel of judges can be
headed by a neutral party – perhaps Nabbi,
who I’m sure is not eavesdropping behind
the bar right now.’
Something banged against the catwalk.
From below the counter, Nabbi’s muffled
voice said, ‘I would be honoured.’
‘There you are, then!’ Junior smiled. ‘Well,
Blitzen? I have challenged you according to
our ancient customs. Will you defend the
honour of your family?’
‘I …’ Blitzen hung his head. ‘Where should
we meet?’
‘The forges in Kenning Square,’ Junior
said. ‘Oh, this will be amusing. Come on,
boys. I have to tell Nurse Bambi about it!’

608/1044

The old dwarf shuffled out with his bodyguards in tow. As soon as they were gone, Blitzen collapsed on Keister-Home and drained
Golden Bowl.
Nabbi emerged from behind the counter.
His caterpillar eyebrows wriggled with concern as he refilled Blitz’s goblet. ‘This one’s
on the house, Blitzen. It’s been nice knowing
you.’
He went back to the kitchen, leaving Blitz
and me alone with Taylor Swift singing ‘I
Know Places’. The lyrics took on a whole new
meaning in a subterranean dwarf world.
‘Are you going to explain what just
happened?’ I asked Blitz. ‘What is this contest at mossglow? Also, what is mossglow?’
‘Mossglow …’ Blitzen stared into his cup.
‘Dwarf version of dawn, when the moss begins to glow. As for the contest …’ He swallowed back a sob. ‘It’s nothing. I’m sure

609/1044

you’ll be able to continue the quest without
me.’
Just then the bar-room doors burst open.
Sam and Hearthstone tumbled inside like
they’d been pushed from a moving car.
‘They’re alive!’ I jumped up. ‘Blitz, look!’
Hearthstone was so excited he couldn’t
even sign. He rushed over and almost
tackled Blitzen off his stool.
‘Hey, buddy.’ Blitz patted his back absently. ‘Yeah, I’m glad to see you, too.’
Sam didn’t hug me, but she managed a
smile. She was scratched up and covered
with leaves and twigs, but she didn’t look
badly hurt. ‘Magnus, glad you haven’t died
yet. I want to be there for that.’
‘Thanks, al-Abbas. What happened to you
guys?’
She shrugged. ‘We hid under the hijab as
long as we could.’

610/1044

With all the other stuff going on, I’d forgotten about the scarf. ‘Yeah, what was that
about? You’ve got an invisibility hijab?’
‘It doesn’t make me invisible. It’s just camouflage. All Valkyries are given swan cloaks
to help us hide when necessary. I just made
mine a hijab.’
‘But you weren’t a swan. You were tree
moss.’
‘It can do different things. Anyway, we
waited until the squirrel left. The barking left
me in bad shape, but, thankfully, Hearth
wasn’t affected. We climbed Yggdrasil for a
while –’
A moose tried to eat us, Hearth signed.
‘Excuse me?’ I asked. ‘A moose?’
Hearth grunted in exasperation. He
spelled out: D-E-E-R. Same sign for both
animals.
‘Oh, that’s much better,’ I said. ‘A deer
tried to eat you.’

611/1044

‘Yes,’ Sam agreed. ‘Dvalinn or maybe Duneyrr – one of the stags that roam the World
Tree. We got away, took a wrong turn into
Alfheim …’
Hearthstone shuddered, then simply
signed, Hate.
‘And here we are.’ Sam eyed Blitzen, whose
expression was still blank with shock. ‘So …
what’s going on?’
I told them about our visit with Freya,
then our conversation with Junior. Hearthstone steadied himself on the bar. He spelled
with one hand: M-a-k-i-n-g? Then he shook
his head vehemently.
‘What do you mean, making?’ I asked.
‘A making,’ Blitz muttered into his goblet,
‘is the dwarven contest. It tests our crafting
skills.’
Sam tapped her fingers on her axe.
‘Judging from your expression, I’m guessing
you don’t trust your skills.’

612/1044

‘I am rubbish at crafting,’ Blitzen said.
Not true, Hearth protested.
‘Hearthstone,’ Blitzen said, ‘even if I was
excellent at crafting, Junior is the most
skilled dwarf alive. He’ll destroy me.’
‘Come on,’ I said. ‘You’ll do fine. And if you
lose we’ll find another way to get that rope.’
Blitzen looked at me mournfully. ‘It’s
worse than that, kid. If I lose, I pay the traditional price: my head.’

FORTY-TWO

We Have a
Pre-Decapitation Party,
with Spring Rolls

Crashing at Blitzen’s apartment was the high
point of our trip. Not that that was saying
much.
Blitz rented the third floor of a terraced
house across the street from Svartalf Mart
(yes, that’s a real thing). Considering the fact
that he was due to be decapitated the next
day, he was a good host. He apologized for
not cleaning up (though the place looked
spotless to me), microwaved some spring

615/1044

rolls and brought out a litre of Diet Sergeant
Pepper and a six-pack of Fjalar’s Foaming
Mead, each bottle uniquely handcrafted in a
different colour of glass.
His furniture was spare but stylish: an Lshaped sofa and two space-age armchairs.
They probably had names and were famous
among living-room furniture, but Blitzen
didn’t introduce them. Neatly arranged on
the coffee table was a spread of dwarf men’s
fashion and interior-design magazines.
While Sam and Hearth sat with Blitz, trying to console him, I paced the room. I felt
angry and guilty that I’d put Blitzen in such a
tight spot. He’d already risked enough for
me. He’d spent two years on the streets
watching out for me when he could’ve been
here, kicking back with spring rolls and
foaming mead. He’d tried to protect me by
attacking the lord of the fire giants with a toy

616/1044

sign. Now he was going to lose his head in a
craft-off with an evil senior citizen.
Also … the dwarven philosophy of crafting
had unsettled me. In Midgard, most things
were breakable, replaceable junk. I’d lived
off that junk for the last two years – picking
through what people discarded, finding bits I
could use or sell or at least make a fire with.
I wondered what it would be like living in
Nidavellir, where every item was crafted to
be a lifetime work of art – right down to your
cup or your chair. It might get annoying to
have to recite the deeds of your shoes before
you put them on in the morning, but at least
you’d know they were amazing shoes.
I wondered about the Sword of Summer.
Freya had told me to befriend it. She’d implied that the weapon had thoughts and
feelings.
Every crafted item has a soul, Blitz had
told me.

617/1044

Maybe I hadn’t properly introduced myself. Maybe I needed to treat the sword like
another companion …
‘Blitz, you must have a speciality,’ Samirah
was saying. ‘What did you study in trade
school?’
‘Fashion.’ Blitzen sniffled. ‘I designed my
own degree programme. But clothing isn’t a
recognized craft. They’ll expect me to hammer molten ingots or tinker with machinery!
I’m no good at that!’
You are, Hearth signed.
‘Not under pressure,’ Blitz said.
‘I don’t get it,’ I said. ‘Why does the loser
have to die? How do they decide the winner?’
Blitzen stared at the cover of Dwarf
Quarterly – New Looks for Spring! 100
Uses for Warg Leather! ‘Each contestant
makes three items. They can be anything. At
the end of the day, the judges rate each item
according to its usefulness, beauty, quality,

618/1044

whatever. They can assign points any way
they wish. The contestant with the most
overall points wins. The other guy dies.’
‘You must not have a lot of competitions,’ I
said, ‘if the loser always gets decapitated.’
‘That’s the traditional wager,’ Blitz said.
‘Most people don’t insist on it any more.
Junior is old-fashioned. Also, he hates me.’
‘Something about Fenris Wolf and your
dad?’
Hearth shook his head to shut me up, but
Blitzen patted his knee. ‘It’s okay, buddy.
They deserve to know.’
Blitz leaned back on the sofa. He seemed
suddenly calmer about his impending doom,
which I found unsettling. I kind of wanted
him to be punching walls.
‘I told you dwarven items are made for
life?’ he said. ‘Well … lifetime for a dwarf can
mean hundreds of years.’

619/1044

I studied Blitz’s beard, wondering if he
dyed out the grey whiskers. ‘How old are
you?’
‘Twenty,’ Blitz said. ‘But Junior … he’s going on five hundred. His dad, Eitri, was one
of the most famous craftsmen in dwarven
history. He lived over a thousand years,
made some of the gods’ most important
items.’
Samirah nibbled on a spring roll. ‘Even
I’ve heard of him. He’s in the old stories. He
made Thor’s hammer.’
Blitz nodded. ‘Anyway, the rope Gleipnir …
you could argue it was his most important
work, even more than Thor’s hammer. The
rope keeps Fenris Wolf from getting free and
starting Doomsday.’
‘I’m with you so far,’ I said.
‘The thing is – the rope was a rush job. The
gods were clamouring for help. They’d
already tried to bind Fenris with two massive

620/1044

chains. They knew their window of opportunity was closing. The Wolf was getting
stronger and wilder by the day. Pretty soon
he’d be uncontrollable. So Eitri … well, he
did his best. Obviously, the rope has held together this long. But a thousand years is a
long time, even for a dwarven rope, especially when the strongest wolf in the universe
is straining against it day and night. My dad,
Bilì, was a great rope maker. He spent years
trying to convince Junior that Gleipnir
needed to be replaced. Junior wouldn’t hear
of it. Junior said he went to the Wolf’s island
from time to time to inspect the rope, and he
swore that Gleipnir was fine. He thought my
dad was just insulting his family’s reputation. Finally my dad …’
Blitz’s voice cracked.
Hearthstone signed, You don’t have to tell.
‘I’m okay.’ Blitzen cleared his throat. ‘Junior used all his influence to turn people

621/1044

against my dad. Our family lost business.
Nobody would buy Bilì’s crafts. Finally Dad
went to the island of Lyngvi himself. He
wanted to check the rope, prove that it
needed replacing. He never came back.
Months later a dwarven patrol found …’ He
looked down and shook his head.
Hearthstone signed, Clothes. Ripped.
Washed up on shore.
Either Samirah was catching on to sign
language or she got the general idea. She put
her fingertips to her mouth. ‘Blitz, I’m so
sorry.’
‘Well –’ he shrugged listlessly – ‘now you
know. Junior is still holding a grudge. My
dad’s death wasn’t enough. He wants to
shame and kill me, too.’
I set my drink on the coffee table. ‘Blitz, I
think I speak for all of us when I say that
Junior can shove his Granny Shuffler –’
‘Magnus …’ Sam warned.

622/1044

‘What? That old dwarf needs to be decapitated in the worst way. What can we do to
help Blitz win the contest?’
‘I appreciate it, kid.’ Blitz struggled to his
feet. ‘But there’s nothing. I … if you’ll excuse
me …’
He staggered to his bedroom and shut the
door behind him.
Samirah pursed her lips. She still had a
twig of Yggdrasil sticking out of her coat
pocket. ‘Is there any chance Junior isn’t that
good? He’s very old now, isn’t he?’
Hearthstone unwrapped his scarf and
threw it on the couch. He wasn’t doing well
in the darkness of Nidavellir. The green veins
on his neck stood out more than usual. His
hair floated with static, like plant tendrils
searching for sunlight.
Junior is very good. He made a sign like
ripping a piece of paper in half and throwing
away the pieces: Hopeless.

623/1044

I felt like throwing bottles of Fjalar’s
Foaming Mead out of the window. ‘But Blitz
can craft, right? Or were you just being
encouraging?’
Hearth rose. He walked to a sideboard
along the dining-room wall. I hadn’t paid the
table much attention, but Hearth pressed
something on its surface – a hidden switch, I
guess – and the tabletop opened like a clamshell. The underside of the top section was
one big light panel. It flickered to life, glowing warm and golden.
‘A tanning bed.’ As soon as I said that, the
truth sank in. ‘When you first came to Nidavellir, Blitzen saved your life. That’s how. He
made a way for you to get sunlight.’
Hearth nodded. First time I used runes for
magic. Mistake. I dropped into Nidavellir.
Almost died. Blitzen – he can craft. Kind
and smart. But no good under pressure.
Contests … no.

624/1044

Sam hugged her knees. ‘So what do we do?
Do you have any magic that will help?’
Hearth hesitated. Some. Will use before
contest. Not enough.
I translated for Sam and then asked, ‘What
can I do?’
Protect him, Hearth signed. Junior will
try to s-a-b-o-t-a-g-e.
‘Sabotage?’ I frowned. ‘Isn’t that cheating?’
‘I’ve heard about this,’ Sam said. ‘In dwarven contests, you can mess with your competitor as long as you aren’t caught. The interference has to look like an accident, or at
least something the judges can’t trace back to
you. But it sounds like Junior doesn’t need to
cheat to win.’
He will cheat. Hearth made a sign like a
hook swinging into a latch. Spite.
‘Okay,’ I said. ‘I’ll keep Blitz safe.’
Still not enough. Hearth peered at Sam.
Only way to win – mess with Junior.

625/1044

When I told Sam what he’d signed, she
turned as grey as a dwarf in sunlight. ‘No.’
She wagged her finger at Hearth. ‘No, absolutely not. I told you.’
Blitz will die, Hearth signed. You did it
before.
‘What’s he talking about?’ I asked. ‘What
did you do before?’
She got to her feet. The tension in the
room was suddenly at DEFCON Two.
‘Hearthstone, you said you wouldn’t mention
it. You promised.’ She faced me, her expression shutting down any further questions.
‘Excuse me. I need some air.’
She stormed out of the apartment.
I stared at Hearthstone. ‘What was that?’
His shoulders slumped. His face was
empty, drained of hope. He signed, A mistake. Then he climbed onto his sunbed and
turned towards the light, his body casting a
wolf-shaped shadow across the floor.

FORTY-THREE

Let the Crafting of
Decorative Metal
Waterfowl Begin

Kenning square looked like a basketball
court without the baskets. A chain-link fence
bordered a stretch of cracked asphalt. Along
one side stood a row of stone pillars carved
like totem poles with dragon heads, centipedes and troll faces. Along the other side,
bleachers were packed with dwarf spectators.
On the court, where the free-throw lines
would’ve been, two open-air blacksmith
shops were ready for action. Each had a

628/1044

forge with bellows to stoke the fire, an assortment of anvils, a few sturdy tables and
racks of tools that looked like torture
equipment.
The crowd seemed prepared for a long
day. They’d brought coolers, blankets and
picnic baskets. A few enterprising dwarves
had parked their food trucks nearby. The
sign for ÌRI’S HANDCRAFTED CONFECTIONS
showed a waffle cone topped with a threestorey ice-cream palace. BUMBURR’S BREAKFAST
BURRITOS had a line twenty dwarves long,
which made me sorry I’d eaten stale doughnuts at Blitz’s place.
As we approached the court, the crowd
gave Blitzen a smattering of applause. Sam
was nowhere to be seen. She’d never come
back to the apartment the previous night. I
wasn’t sure whether to be worried or angry.

629/1044

Junior was waiting, leaning on his goldplated walker. His two bodyguards stood behind him, dressed like their boss in overalls
and leather gauntlets.
‘Well, well, Blitzen.’ The old dwarf
sneered. ‘Mossglow started ten minutes ago.
Were you getting your beauty sleep?’
Blitzen looked like he hadn’t slept at all.
His eyes were sunken and bloodshot. He’d
spent the past hour worrying about what to
wear, finally deciding on grey slacks, a smart
white shirt with black braces, pointy black
shoes and a pork-pie hat. He might not win
for his crafting, but he would definitely get
the vote for best-dressed blacksmith.
He glanced around distractedly. ‘Get
started?’
The crowd cheered. Hearthstone accompanied Blitzen to the forge. After a night on
Blitzen’s tanning bed, the elf’s face had a
rosy sheen as if he’d been infused with

630/1044

paprika. Before we left the apartment, he’d
cast a rune on Blitz to help him feel rested
and focused, which had left Hearth exhausted and unfocused. Nevertheless,
Hearth stoked the forge while Blitzen
puttered around his workstation, staring in
confusion at the racks of tools and baskets of
metal ore.
Meanwhile Junior scooted around on his
walker, barking at one of his bodyguards to
fetch him a lump of iron and a sack of bone
chips. The other bodyguard stood watch,
scanning for anything that might disrupt his
boss’s work.
I tried to do the same for Blitz, but I
doubted I looked as intimidating as a muscular dwarf in overalls. (And, yes, that was
depressing.)
After about an hour, my initial adrenaline
rush wore off. I began to realize why the
spectators had brought picnic lunches.

631/1044

Crafting was not a fast-moving sport. Every
once in a while the crowd would clap or murmur approvingly when Junior struck a good
hit with his hammer, or plunged a piece of
metal into the cooling vat with a satisfying
hiss. Nabbi and two other judges paced back
and forth between the workstations, scribbling notes on their clipboards. But, for me,
most of the the morning was spent standing
around with the Sword of Summer in my
hand, trying not to look like a fool.
A couple of times I had to do my job. Once
a dart shot out of nowhere, heading for Blitzen. The Sword of Summer leaped into action. Before I even knew what was happening, the blade sliced the dart out of the air.
The crowd applauded, which would have
been gratifying if I’d actually done anything.
A little later, a random dwarf charged me
from the sidelines, swinging an axe and
screaming, ‘BLOOD!’ I hit him in the head

632/1044

with the hilt of my sword. He collapsed.
More polite applause. A couple of bystanders
hauled the dwarf away by his ankles.
Junior was busy hammering out a red-hot
iron cylinder the size of a shotgun barrel.
He’d already crafted a dozen smaller mechanisms that I guessed would fit together with
the cylinder, but I couldn’t tell what the final
product was supposed to be. The old dwarf’s
walker didn’t slow him down at all. He had
some trouble shuffling around, but he could
stand in one place just fine. Despite his age,
his arm muscles were ripped from a lifetime
of swinging hammers at anvils.
Meanwhile, Blitzen hunched over his
worktable with a pair of needle-nose pliers,
connecting thin sheets of curved metal into
some kind of figurine. Hearthstone stood
nearby, drenched with sweat from working
the bellows.

633/1044

I tried not to worry about how exhausted
Hearth looked, or where Sam was, or how
many times Blitzen dropped his tools and
wept over his project.
Finally Nabbi yelled, ‘Ten minutes until
mid-morning break!’
Blitzen sobbed. He attached another sheet
of metal to his project, which was starting to
resemble a duck.
Most of the crowd focused on the other
workstation, where Junior was attaching
various mechanisms to the cylinder. He
hobbled to the forge and reheated the whole
contraption until it was glowing red.
Carefully, he set the cylinder against the
anvil, holding it steady with his tongs. He
raised his hammer.
Just as he struck, something went wrong.
Junior screamed. The hammer went askew,
flattening the cylinder and sending

634/1044

attachments flying everywhere. Junior
staggered backwards, his hands cupped over
his face.
His bodyguards rushed to his aid, crying,
‘What? What is it?’
I couldn’t hear the whole conversation, but
apparently some kind of insect had bitten
Junior between the eyes.
‘Did you get it?’ asked one of the guards.
‘No! The little pest flew off! Quick, before
the cylinder cools –’
‘Time!’ shouted Nabbi.
Junior stomped his foot and cursed. He
glared at his ruined project and yelled at his
bodyguards.
I went to check on Blitzen, who sat
slumped on his anvil. His pork-pie hat was
pushed back on his head. His left brace had
snapped.
‘How you doing, champ?’ I asked.

635/1044

‘Horrible.’ He gestured at his project. ‘I
made a duck.’
‘Yeah …’ I searched for a compliment. ‘It’s
a really nice duck. That’s the bill, right? And
those are the wings?’
Hearthstone sat next to us on the asphalt.
Ducks, he signed. Always ducks.
‘I’m sorry,’ Blitz moaned. ‘When I’m
stressed, I default to waterfowl. I don’t know
why.’
‘No worries,’ I said. ‘Junior had a setback.
His first project is pretty much ruined.’
Blitz tried to brush the cinders off his
white shirt. ‘It doesn’t matter. Junior’s first
item is always his warm-up. He’s got two
more chances to destroy me.’
‘Hey, none of that.’ I rummaged through
our supply bag and handed out canteens of
water and some peanut-butter crackers.
Hearthstone ate like a starving elf. Then he
sat back and shone a flashlight on his face,

636/1044

trying to absorb the rays. Blitzen barely
sipped his water.
‘I never wanted this,’ Blitz murmured.
‘Crafting contests, magic items. All I ever
wanted was to design quality clothing and
sell it at reasonable prices in my own store.’
I stared at his sweat-stained collar and
thought about what Freya had said: Blitzen is
a genius at fabrics and fashion. The other
dwarves don’t appreciate his expertise, but I
think it’s marvellous.
‘That’s your dream,’ I realized. ‘That’s why
you drank from Mimir’s Well – to find out
how to open a clothing shop?’
Blitzen scowled. ‘It was more than that. I
wanted to follow my dream. I wanted other
dwarves to stop laughing at me. I wanted to
avenge my father’s death and restore the
family’s honour! But those things didn’t go
together. I went to Mimir for advice.’
‘And … what did he say?’

637/1044

Blitzen shrugged helplessly. ‘Four years of
service – that was the price for drinking from
his well. He said the cost of knowledge was
also the answer. By serving him, I would get
what I wanted. Except I didn’t. Now I’m going to die.’
No, Hearth signed. Someday you will get
your dream.
‘How, exactly?’ Blitzen asked. ‘It’s a little
hard to cut and sew fabric when you’re
decapitated.’
‘That’s not going to happen,’ I said.
In my chest, several ideas started to smelt
together into a usable molten ingot – unless
that sensation was just the peanut-butter
crackers. I thought about my sword that
could turn into a pendant, and Sam’s hijab
that was magical high-tech camouflage.
‘Blitz, your next two items are going to be
awesome.’

638/1044

‘How do you know? I might panic and
make more ducks!’
‘You want to make clothing, right? So
make clothing.’
‘Kid, this is a forge, not a haberdashery.
Besides, fashion is not a recognized craft.’
‘What about armour?’
Blitz hesitated. ‘Well, yeah, but –’
‘What about fashionable clothing that
doubles as armour?’
Blitz’s mouth fell open. ‘Balder’s Bling …
Kid, you may be on to something!’ He shot to
his feet and began hurrying around the
workspace, gathering tools.
Hearth beamed at me – literally, since he
still had the flashlight aimed at his face. He
tapped his free hand to his head – the sign
for genius.
When Nabbi called time, I took over at the
bellows to give Hearth a rest. He stood

639/1044

guard. Stoking the fire was about as fun as
riding a stationary bike inside a baking oven.
After a while, Blitzen took me off the bellows and had me assist with the crafting. I
was hopeless at it, but being forced to give
me directions seemed to increase Blitz’s confidence. ‘No, put that here. No, the big tongs!
Hold it steady, kid! That’s not steady!’
I lost track of time. I didn’t pay much attention to what Blitz was making –
something small, woven from chain. Instead
I kept thinking about the Sword of Summer,
now back in pendant form around my neck.
I remembered walking from the docks to
Copley Square, half delirious with hunger
and exhaustion, and the imaginary conversation I’d had with the blade. I considered how
the sword either hummed or stayed silent,
either guided my hand or lay heavy and inert. If it had a soul and emotions – then I
hadn’t given it enough credit. I’d been

640/1044

treating it like a dangerous object. I should
be treating it like a person.
‘Thanks,’ I said under my breath, trying
not to feel ridiculous. ‘When you cut that
dart out of the air earlier, you saved my
friend. I should’ve thanked you sooner.’
The pendant seemed to grow warmer,
though standing next to the forge it was hard
to be sure.
‘Sumarbrander,’ I said. ‘Is that what you
like to be called? Sorry I’ve been ignoring
you.’
Hmmm, the pendant hummed sceptically.
‘You’re much more than a sword,’ I said.
‘You’re not just for slashing at things. You –’
From across the courtyard, Nabbi yelled,
‘Ten minutes until lunch break!’
‘Oh, gods,’ Blitzen muttered. ‘I can’t – Kid,
quick! Hand me that texturing hammer.’
His hands flew, snatching up various tools,
making minor adjustments to his creation. It

641/1044

didn’t look like much – just a flat, narrow
length of chain mail – but Blitz worked as if
his life depended on it, which it did.
He folded and crimped the chain mail into
its final shape, then soldered the seam.
‘It’s a necktie!’ I realized. ‘Blitzen, I actually recognize what you made!’
‘Thank you. Shut up.’ He raised his soldering gun and announced, ‘Done!’ just as a
crash reverberated from Junior’s
workstation.
‘GAAHHH!’ screamed the old dwarf.
The entire crowd surged to their feet.
Junior was on his butt, cradling his face in
his hands. On his worktable sat a flattened,
misshapen lump of cooling iron.
His bodyguards rushed to help him.
‘Damnable insect!’ Junior howled. He was
bleeding from the bridge of his nose. He
looked at his palms but apparently found no

642/1044

squashed bug. ‘I hit it this time, I’m sure!
Where is it?’
Nabbi and the other judges frowned in our
direction, as if we somehow might have orchestrated a kamikaze insect attack. I guess
we looked clueless enough to convince them
otherwise.
‘Time for lunch,’ Nabbi announced. ‘One
more item shall be made this afternoon!’
We ate quickly, because Blitz was raring to
get back to work.
‘I’ve got the hang of it now,’ he said. ‘I’ve
got it. Kid, I owe you big-time.’
I glanced over at Junior’s workstation. His
bodyguards were glaring at me, cracking
their knuckles.
‘Let’s just get through the contest,’ I said. ‘I
wish Sam was here. We may need to fight
our way out.’
Hearth gave me a curious look when I
mentioned Sam.

643/1044

‘What?’ I asked.
He shook his head and went back to eating
his watercress sandwich.
The afternoon session went quickly. I was
so busy on guard duty I barely had time to
think. Junior must have hired some extra
saboteurs, because every half hour or so I
had to deal with a new threat: a spear thrown
from the audience, a rotten apple aimed at
Blitzen’s head, a steam-powered predator
drone and a pair of dwarves in green Spandex jumpsuits wielding baseball bats. (The
less said about that, the better.) Each time,
the Sword of Summer guided my hand and
neutralized the threat. Each time, I remembered to thank the sword.
I could almost discern its voice now: Yeah,
okay. Mmm-hmm. I suppose. Like it was
slowly warming up to me, getting over its resentment at being ignored.

644/1044

Hearthstone rushed around the workstation, bringing Blitz extra materials and tools.
Blitz was weaving a larger, more complicated
piece of metal fabric. Whatever it was, he
seemed pleased.
Finally, he set down his bezel roller and
shouted, ‘Success!’
At the same moment, Junior suffered his
most spectacular fail. His bodyguards had
been standing close, ready for another kamikaze insect attack, but it made no difference.
As Junior brought down his hammer for a
master stroke, a dark speck zipped out of the
sky. The horsefly bit Junior on the face so
hard he spun sideways under the momentum
of his hammer. Wailing and staggering, he
knocked both his guards unconscious, destroyed the contents of two worktables and
swept his third invention into the forge before he collapsed on the asphalt.

645/1044

It shouldn’t have been funny – an old
dwarf getting humiliated like that. Except
that it was, kind of. Probably because that
old dwarf was a spiteful, nasty piece of work.
In the midst of the commotion, Nabbi rang
a hand bell. ‘The contest has ended!’ he announced. ‘Time for judging the items … and
killing the loser!’

FORTY-FOUR

Junior Wins a Bag of
Tears

Sam picked that moment to show up.
She shouldered through the crowd, her
headscarf pulled low over her face. Her jacket was dusted with ash, as if she’d spent the
night in a chimney.
I wanted to yell at her for being gone so
long, but my anger evaporated when I noticed her black eye and swollen lip.
‘What happened?’ I asked. ‘Are you okay?’
‘Little scuffle,’ she said. ‘No worries. Let’s
watch the judging.’

648/1044

Spectators gathered around two tables on
the sideline, where Junior’s and Blitzen’s
crafts were on display. Blitzen stood with his
hands clasped behind his back, looking confident despite his snapped braces, his greasestained shirt and his sweat-soaked pork-pie
hat.
Junior’s face was a bloody mess. He could
barely hold himself up on his walker. The
murderous gleam in his eyes made him look
like a serial killer exhausted after a hard
day’s work.
Nabbi and the other judges circled the
tables, inspecting the crafted items and jotting notes on their clipboards.
At last Nabbi faced the audience. He
arched his wriggly eyebrows and tried for a
smile.
‘Well, then!’ he said. ‘Thank you all for attending this contest, sponsored by Nabbi’s
Tavern, famous among taverns, built by

649/1044

Nabbi and home to Nabbi’s Stout, the only
mead you’ll ever need. Now our contestants
will tell us about their first items. Blitzen,
son of Freya!’
Blitz gestured to his metal sculpture. ‘It’s a
duck.’
Nabbi blinked. ‘And … what does it do?’
‘When I press its back …’ Blitzen did so.
The duck swelled to three times its size, like
a frightened pufferfish. ‘It turns into a larger
duck.’
The second judge scratched his beard.
‘That’s it?’
‘Well, yes,’ Blitz said. ‘I call it the
Expando-Duck. It’s perfect if you need a
small metal duck. Or a larger metal duck.’
The third judge turned to his colleagues.
‘Garden knick-knack, perhaps? Conversation
piece? Decoy?’

650/1044

Nabbi coughed. ‘Yes, thank you, Blitzen.
And now you, Eitri Junior, son of Edna.
What is your first creation?’
Junior wiped the blood out of his eyes. He
held up his flattened iron cylinder, with several springs and latches dangling from it.
‘This is a self-guiding troll-seeking missile! If
it were undamaged, it could destroy any troll
at a distance of half a mile. And it’s reusable!’
The crowd murmured appreciatively.
‘Um, but does it work?’ asked the second
judge.
‘No!’ Junior said. ‘It was ruined on the final hammer stroke. But if it did work –’
‘But it doesn’t,’ observed the third judge.
‘So what is it at the moment?’
‘It’s a useless metal cylinder!’ Junior
snarled. ‘Which isn’t my fault!’
The judges conferred and scribbled some
notes.

651/1044

‘So, in the first round,’ Nabbi summed up,
‘we have an expandable duck versus a useless metal cylinder. Our contestants are running very close indeed. Blitzen, what is your
second item?’
Blitzen proudly held up his chain-mail
neckware. ‘The bulletproof tie!’
The judges lowered their clipboards in
perfect synchronicity.
‘What?’ asked Nabbi.
‘Oh, come now!’ Blitz turned to the audience. ‘How many of you have been in the embarrassing situation of wearing a bulletproof
waistcoat without a matching bulletproof
tie?’
In the back of the crowd, one dwarf raised
his hand.
‘Exactly!’ Blitzen said. ‘Not only is this accessory fashionable, but it will stop anything
up to a 30-06 round. It can also be worn as a
cravat.’

652/1044

The judges frowned and took notes, but a
few audience members seemed impressed.
They examined their shirts, maybe thinking
how underdressed they felt without a chainmail neckpiece.
‘Junior?’ asked Nabbi. ‘What is your
second work of craftsmanship?’
‘The Goblet of Infinity!’ Junior gestured to
a misshapen hunk of iron. ‘It holds a limitless amount of any liquid – great for road
trips through waterless wastelands.’
‘Uh …’ Nabbi pointed with his pen. ‘It
looks a bit crushed.’
‘Stupid horsefly again!’ Junior protested.
‘It bit me right between the eyes! Not my
fault if an insect turned my brilliant invention into a slag heap.’
‘Slag heap,’ Nabbi repeated, jotting on his
clipboard. ‘And, Blitzen, your final item?’
Blitzen held up a glittering length of
woven-metal fabric. ‘The chain-mail

653/1044

waistcoat! For use with a three-piece suit of
chain mail. Or, if you want to dress it down,
you can wear it with jeans and a nice shirt.’
And a shield, Hearthstone offered.
‘Yes, and a shield,’ Blitzen said.
The third judge leaned forward, squinting.
‘I suppose it would offer some minor protection. If you were stabbed in the back at a
disco, for instance.’
The second judge jotted something down.
‘Does it have any magical abilities?’
‘Well, no,’ Blitz said. ‘But it’s reversible:
silver on the outside, gold on the inside.
Depending on what jewellery you’re wearing,
or what colour armour –’
‘I see.’ Nabbi made a note on his clipboard
and turned to Junior. ‘And your final item,
sir?’
Junior’s fists trembled with rage. ‘This is
unfair! I have never lost a contest. All of you

654/1044

know my skills. This meddler, this poseur Blitzen has somehow managed to ruin my –’
‘Eitri Junior, son of Edna,’ interrupted
Nabbi, ‘what is your third item?’
He waved impatiently at the furnace. ‘My
third item is in there! It doesn’t matter what
it was, because it’s now boiling sludge!’
The judges circled up and conferred. The
crowd shifted restlessly.
Nabbi faced the audience. ‘Judging has
been difficult. We have weighed the merits of
Junior’s boiling sludge, slag heap and useless
metal cylinder against the chain-mail waistcoat, bulletproof tie and Expando-Duck. It
was a close call. However, we judge the winner of this contest to be Blitzen, son of
Freya!’
Spectators applauded. Some gasped in disbelief. A female dwarf in a nurse’s outfit,
possibly Bambi, famous among dwarf
nurses, passed out cold.

655/1044

Hearthstone jumped up and down and
made the ends of his scarf do the wave. I
looked for Sam, but she was hanging back at
the edges of the crowd.
Junior scowled at his fists as if deciding
whether to hit himself. ‘Fine,’ he growled.
‘Take my head! I don’t want to live in a world
where Blitzen wins crafting contests!’
‘Junior, I don’t want to kill you,’ Blitzen
said. Despite his win, he didn’t sound proud
or gloating. He looked tired, maybe even sad.
Junior blinked. ‘You – you don’t?’
‘No. Just give me the earrings and the rope
as you promised. Oh, and a public admission
that my father was right about Gleipnir all
along. You should have replaced it centuries
ago.’
‘Never!’ Junior shrieked. ‘You impugn my
father’s reputation! I cannot –’

656/1044

‘Okay, I’ll get my axe,’ Blitzen said in a
resigned tone. ‘I’m afraid the blade is a little
dull …’
Junior gulped. He looked longingly at the
bulletproof necktie. ‘Very well. Perhaps …
perhaps Bilì had a point. The rope needed
replacement.’
‘And you were wrong to tarnish his
reputation.’
The old dwarf’s facial muscles convulsed,
but he managed to get out the words. ‘And I
was … wrong. Yes.’
Blitzen gazed up into the gloom, whispering something under his breath. I wasn’t a
good lip-reader, but I was pretty sure he
said, I love you, Dad. Goodbye.
He refocused on Junior. ‘Now, about the
items you promised …’
Junior snapped his fingers. One of his
bodyguards wobbled over, his head newly
bandaged from his recent encounter with a

657/1044

hammer. He handed Blitzen a small velvet
box.
‘Earrings for your mother,’ Junior said.
Blitz opened the box. Inside were two tiny
cats made from gold filigree like Brisingamen. As I watched, the cats stretched, blinking their emerald eyes and flicking their diamond tails.
Blitz snapped the box shut. ‘Adequate. And
the rope?’
The bodyguard tossed him a ball of silk
kite string.
‘You’re joking,’ I said. ‘That’s supposed to
bind Fenris Wolf?’
Junior glowered at me. ‘Boy, your ignorance is breathtaking. Gleipnir was just as
thin and light, but its paradox ingredients
gave it great strength. This rope is the same,
only better!’
‘Paradox ingredients?’

658/1044

Blitz held up the end of the rope and
whistled appreciatively. ‘He means things
that aren’t supposed to exist. Paradox ingredients are very difficult to craft with, very
dangerous. Gleipnir contained the footfall of
a cat, the spittle of a bird, the breath of a fish,
the beard of a woman.’
‘Dunno if that last one is a paradox,’ I said.
‘Crazy Alice in Chinatown has a pretty good
beard.’
Junior huffed. ‘The point is, this rope is
even better! I call it Andskoti, the Adversary.
It is woven with the most powerful paradoxes in the Nine Worlds – Wi-Fi with no
lag, a politician’s sincerity, a printer that
prints, healthy deep-fried food and an interesting grammar lecture!’
‘Okay, yeah,’ I admitted. ‘Those things
don’t exist.’
Blitz stuffed the rope in his backpack. He
took out his pouch of tears and handed it to

659/1044

the old dwarf. ‘Thank you, Junior. I consider
our bargain complete, but I would ask one
more thing. Where is the island of Fenris
Wolf?’
Junior hefted his payment. ‘If I could tell
you, Blitzen, I would. I’d be happy to see you
ripped apart by the Wolf like your father
was! Alas, I don’t know.’
‘But –’
‘Yes, I said I checked on the rope from
time to time. I lied! The truth is, very few
gods or dwarves know where the Wolf’s island appears. Most of them are sworn to
secrecy. How your father found the place, I
really don’t know, but, if you want to find it,
the best person to ask is Thor. He knows,
and he has a big mouth.’
‘Thor,’ I said. ‘Where do we find Thor?’
‘I have no idea,’ Junior admitted.
Hearthstone signed, Sam might. She
knows a lot about the gods.

660/1044

‘Yeah.’ I turned. ‘Sam, get over here! Why
are you lurking?’
The crowd parted around her.
As soon as Junior saw her, he made a
strangled squawk. ‘You! It was you!’
Sam tried to cover her busted lip. ‘Sorry?
Have we met?’
‘Oh, don’t play innocent with me.’ Junior
scooted forward on his walker, his flushed
scalp turning his grey hair pink. ‘I’ve seen
shape-shifters before. That scarf is the same
colour as the horsefly’s wings. And that black
eye is from when I swatted you! You’re in
league with Blitzen! Friends, colleagues,
honest dwarves – kill these cheaters!’
I was proud that the four of us responded
as a team. In perfect unison, like a well-oiled
combat machine, we turned and ran for our
lives.

FORTY-FIVE

I Get to Know Jack

I’m pretty good at multitasking, so I figured I
could flee in terror and argue at the same
time.
‘A horsefly?’ I yelled at Sam. ‘You can turn
into a horsefly?’
She ducked as a steam-powered dart
buzzed over her head. ‘Now is not the time!’
‘Oh, excuse me. I should wait for the
designated talk-about-turning-into-horseflies time.’
Hearthstone and Blitzen led the way. Behind us, a mob of thirty dwarves was closing
fast. I didn’t like their murderous

663/1044

expressions or their fine assortment of handcrafted weapons.
‘This way!’ Blitzen ducked down an alley.
Unfortunately, Hearthstone wasn’t watching. The elf barrelled straight ahead.
‘Mother!’ Blitz cursed – at least, I thought
it was a curse until Sam and I reached the
corner and faltered.
A few steps down the alley, Blitz was
trapped in a net of light. He squirmed and
cussed as the glowing web lifted him into the
air. ‘It’s my mother!’ he yelped. ‘She wants
her damnable earrings. Go! Catch up with
Hearthstone! I’ll meet you –’
POP! Our dwarf disappeared in a flash.
I glanced at Sam. ‘Did that just happen?’
‘We’ve got other problems.’ She pulled out
her axe.
The mob had caught up with us. They
fanned out in an angry semicircle of beards,
scowls, baseball bats and broadswords. I

664/1044

wasn’t sure what they were waiting for. Then
I heard Junior’s voice somewhere behind
them. ‘Hold on!’ he wheezed. ‘I –’ Wheeze.
‘Kill –’ Wheeze. ‘First!’
The mob parted. Flanked by his bodyguards, the old dwarf pushed his walker towards us.
He eyed me, then Sam.
‘Where are Blitzen and the elf?’ Junior
muttered. ‘Well, no matter. We’ll find them.
You, boy, I don’t care about so much. Run
now and I might let you live. The girl is obviously a daughter of Loki. She bit me and
ruined my crafting! She dies.’
I pulled off my pendant. The Sword of
Summer grew to full length. The crowd of
dwarves edged backwards. I guess they knew
a dangerous blade when they saw one.
‘I’m not going anywhere,’ I said. ‘You’ll
have to take on both of us.’
The sword hummed for attention.

665/1044

‘Correction,’ I said. ‘You’ll have to take on
all three of us. This is Sumarbrander, the
Sword of Summer, crafted by … actually I’m
not sure, but it is definitely famous among
swords, and it is about to kick your collective
butts.’
‘Thank you,’ said the sword.
Sam made a squeaking noise. The
dwarves’ shocked expressions told me I
hadn’t imagined hearing the sword’s voice.
I held up the blade. ‘You can talk? I mean
… of course you can talk. You have many, uh,
incredible abilities.’
‘That’s what I’ve been saying.’ The sword’s
voice was definitely male. It emanated from
the runes along the blade, which vibrated
and glowed with every word like the lights on
a stereo equalizer.
I gave the dwarves an arrogant look, like,
Yeah, that’s right. I’ve got a talking disco
sword and you don’t.

666/1044

‘Sumarbrander,’ I said, ‘how do you feel
about taking on this mob?’
‘Sure,’ said the sword. ‘You want them
dead or …?’
The mob shuffled backwards in alarm.
‘Nah,’ I decided. ‘Just make them go away.’
‘You’re no fun,’ the sword said. ‘Okay,
then, let go.’
I hesitated. I didn’t particularly want to
hold a flashing, talking, humming sword, but
dropping my weapon didn’t seem like the
natural first step towards victory.
Junior must’ve sensed my reluctance.
‘We can take him!’ he yelled. ‘He’s one boy
with a sword he doesn’t know how to use!’
Sam snarled. ‘And a former Valkyrie with
an axe she very much does know how to use.’
‘Bah!’ Junior said. ‘Let’s get ’em, boys!
Granny Shuffler, activate!’
Rows of dagger blades extended from the
front of his walker. Two miniature rocket

667/1044

engines fired in the back, propelling Junior
towards us at a mind-boggling one mile an
hour. His comrades roared and charged.
I let go of my sword. It hovered in the air
for a split second. Then it flew into action.
Faster than you could say son of Edna, every
dwarf was disarmed. Their weapons were cut
in half, split down the middle, knocked to the
ground or diced into hors d’oeuvre-size
cubes. The daggers and rockets were sheared
off Junior’s walker. The severed ends of
thirty beards fluttered to the ground, leaving
thirty shocked dwarves with fifty per cent
less facial hair.
The Sword of Summer hovered between
the mob and me.
‘Anybody want more?’ the sword asked.
The dwarves turned and fled.
Junior yelled over his shoulder as he
hobbled away, following his bodyguards,
who were already a block ahead of him. ‘This

668/1044

isn’t over, boy! I’ll be back with
reinforcements!’
Sam lowered her axe. ‘That was … Wow.’
‘Yeah,’ I agreed. ‘Thank you,
Sumarbrander.’
‘De nada,’ said the sword. ‘But, you know,
Sumarbrander is a really long name, and I’ve
never liked it much.’
‘Okay.’ I wasn’t sure where to look when
addressing the sword – the glowing runes?
The tip of the blade? ‘What would you like us
to call you?’
The sword hummed thoughtfully. ‘What is
your name?’
‘Magnus.’
‘That’s a good name. Call me Magnus.’
‘You can’t be Magnus. I’m Magnus.’
‘Then what is her name?’
‘Sam. You can’t be Sam, either. It would be
too confusing.’

669/1044

The blade swished from side to side. ‘Well,
what is a good name? Something that fits my
personality and my many talents.’
‘But I don’t really know you as well as I’d
like to.’ I looked at Samirah, who just shook
her head like, Hey, it’s your disco sword.
‘Honestly,’ I said. ‘I don’t know jack –’
‘Jack!’ the sword cried. ‘Perfect!’
The thing about talking swords … it’s hard
to tell when they’re kidding. They have no facial expressions. Or faces.
‘So … you want me to call you Jack.’
‘It is a noble name,’ said the sword. ‘Fit for
kings and sharp carving implements!’
‘Okay,’ I said. ‘Well, then, Jack, thanks for
the save. You mind if …?’ I reached for the
hilt, but Jack floated away from me.
‘I wouldn’t do that yet,’ he warned. ‘The
price of my amazing abilities: as soon as you
sheathe me, or turn me into a pendant, or

670/1044

whatever, you will feel just as exhausted as if
you had performed all my actions yourself.’
My shoulder muscles tightened. I considered how tired I would feel if I had just
destroyed all those weapons and cut all those
beards. ‘Oh. I didn’t notice that earlier.’
‘Because you hadn’t used me for anything
amazing yet.’
‘Right.’
In the distance, an air-raid horn howled. I
doubted they got many air raids in an underground world, so I figured the alarm had to
do with us.
‘We need to go,’ Sam urged. ‘We have to
find Hearthstone. I doubt Junior was joking
about reinforcements.’
Finding Hearthstone was the easy part.
Two blocks away, we ran into him as he was
coming back to find us.
What the H-e-l-h-e-i-m? he signed. Where
is Blitzen?

671/1044

I told him about Freya’s gold net. ‘We’ll
find him. Right now, Junior is calling up the
Dwarven National Guard.’
Your sword is floating, Hearth noted.
‘Your elf is deaf,’ Jack noted.
I turned to the sword. ‘I know that. Sorry,
introductions. Jack, Hearth. Hearth, Jack.’
Hearth signed, Is it talking? I don’t read
sword lips.
‘What is he saying?’ Jack asked. ‘I don’t
read elf hands.’
‘Guys.’ Sam pointed behind us. A few
blocks away, an iron-plated vehicle with
caterpillar treads and a mounted turret was
turning slowly onto our street.
‘That’s a tank’ I said. ‘Junior has a tank?’
‘We should leave,’ Jack said. ‘I am awesome, but if I try to destroy a tank the strain
might kill you.’
‘Yeah,’ I agreed. ‘How do we get out of
Nidavellir?’

672/1044

Hearthstone clapped for my attention.
This way.
We sprinted after him, zigzagging through
alleys, knocking over carefully handcrafted
garbage cans that probably had names and
souls.
From somewhere behind us, a deep
BOOM! rattled windows and made pebbles
rain from above.
‘Is the tank shaking the sky?’ I yelled.
‘That can’t be good.’
Hearthstone led us down another street of
terraced clapboard houses. Dwarves sat on
stoops, clapping and cheering as we ran by.
A few of them recorded videos of us on
uniquely crafted smartphones. I figured our
attempted getaway would go viral on the
Dwarven Internet, famous among Internets.
Finally we reached what would’ve been the
southern edge of South Boston. On the far

673/1044

side of the avenue, instead of the M Street
Beach, the ground dropped off into a chasm.
‘Oh, this is very helpful,’ Sam said.
Behind us in the gloom, Junior’s voice
shouted, ‘Bazookas, take the right flank!’
Hearthstone led us to the rim of the
canyon. Far below, a river roared.
He signed, We jump in.
‘Are you serious?’ I asked.
Blitzen and I did this before. River washes
out of Nidavellir.
‘To where?’
Depends, Hearthstone signed.
‘That’s not reassuring,’ said Sam.
Hearthstone pointed back towards the avenue. The dwarven mob was gathering, tanks
and jeeps and RPGs and a whole bunch of
really angry geriatric dwarves in armourplated walkers.
‘We jump,’ I decided.

674/1044

Jack the Sword hovered next to me. ‘Better
hold me now, boss. Otherwise I might get
lost again.’
‘But you said the exhaustion –’
‘Might make you pass out,’ the sword
agreed. ‘On the bright side, it looks like
you’re going to die anyway.’
He had a point. (Oh, sorry. That was bad.)
I took the sword and willed it back into
pendant form. I just had time to attach it to
the chain before my legs buckled.
Sam caught me. ‘Hearthstone! Take his
other arm!’
As my vision went dark, Sam and Hearth
helped me leap off the cliff. Because, you
know, what are friends for?

FORTY-SIX

Aboard the Good Ship
Toenail

I knew I was in trouble when I woke up
dreaming.
I found myself standing next to Loki on
the deck of a massive ship.
‘There you are!’ said Loki. ‘I was starting to
wonder.’
‘How …?’ I noticed his outfit. ‘What are
you wearing?’
‘You like it?’ His scarred lips twisted into a
grin. His white admiral’s jacket gleamed with
medals, but Loki wasn’t exactly wearing it

677/1044

regulation-style. It was open over a black Tshirt featuring Jack Nicholson’s face from
The Shining. The caption read: HEEEERE’S
LOKI!

‘Where are we?’ I asked.
Loki polished his medals with his coat
sleeve. ‘Well, neither of us is here, of course.
I’m still tied up on a stone slab with snake
poison dripping in my face. You’re dying on
the banks of a river in Jotunheim.’
‘I’m what?’
‘Whether you live or not, this may be our
last chance to talk. I wanted you to see this –
Naglfar, the Ship of Nails! It’s almost
complete.’
The ship came into clearer focus – a Viking longship larger than an aircraft carrier.
The main deck could’ve accommodated the
Boston Marathon. Giant shields lined the
railings. Fore and aft rose thirty-foot-tall

678/1044

figureheads shaped like snarling wolves.
Naturally, they had to be wolves.
I peered over the side between two shields.
A hundred feet down, braided iron cables
moored the ship to a dock. The grey sea
churned with ice.
I ran my hand along the railing. The surface was bumpy and prickly – enamelled
with white and grey ridges like fish scales or
pearl shavings. At first glance, I’d assumed
the deck was made of steel, but now I realized the whole ship was constructed of this
weird translucent material – not metal, not
wood, but something strangely familiar.
‘What is this?’ I asked Loki. ‘I don’t see any
wood or nails. Why is it called the Ship of
Nails?’
Loki chuckled. ‘Not carpentry nails, Magnus. Naglfar is made from the fingernails
and toenails of dead men.’

679/1044

The deck seemed to pitch beneath me. I
wasn’t sure if it was possible to puke in a
dream, but I was tempted. It wasn’t just the
obvious grossness of standing on a ship
made of nail clippings that made me nauseated – it was the sheer volume of the material. How many corpses had had to contribute
their nails to make a ship this size?
Once I managed to steady my breathing, I
faced Loki. ‘Why?’
Even with the ruined lips and scarred face,
Loki’s grin was so infectious that I almost
smiled back – almost.
‘Amazingly disgusting, isn’t it?’ he said.
‘Back in the old days, your ancestors knew
that nail clippings carried part of your spirit,
your essence … your DNA, you’d call it now.
Throughout their lives, mortals were careful
to burn any clippings they made. When they
died, their nails would be trimmed and the
clippings destroyed so the material wouldn’t

680/1044

contribute to this great ship. But sometimes
–’ Loki shrugged – ‘as you can see, the proper precautions weren’t taken.’
‘You’ve built yourself a battleship out of
toenails.’
‘Well, the ship is building itself. And, technically, Naglfar belongs to Surt and the fire
giants, but when Ragnarok comes I will
guide this ship out of the harbour. We’ll have
an army of giants led by Captain Hrym, plus
hundreds of thousands of dishonoured dead
from Helheim – all those who were careless
or unlucky enough to die without a sword in
their hand, a proper burial and a decent
post-mortem mani-pedi. We’ll sail to Asgard
and destroy the gods. It’ll be awesome.’
I looked aft, expecting to see an army gathering on the shore, but the mist was so thick
I couldn’t see the end of the dock. Despite
my usual resistance to cold, the damp air

681/1044

soaked into my bones and made my teeth
chatter.
‘Why are you showing me this?’ I asked.
‘Because I like you, Magnus. You’ve got a
sense of humour. You’ve got zing. So rare in
a demigod! Even rarer among the einherjar.
I’m glad my daughter found you.’
‘Samirah … that’s how she can turn into a
horsefly. She’s a shape-shifter like you.’
‘Oh, she’s Daddy’s girl, all right. She
doesn’t like to admit it, but she’s inherited a
lot of things from me: my abilities, my dashing good looks, my keen intellect. She can
spot talent, too. After all, she chose you, my
friend.’
I clutched my stomach. ‘I don’t feel so
good.’
‘Duh! You’re on the verge of death. Personally, I hope you wake up, because if you
kick the bucket now your death will be

682/1044

meaningless and nothing you’ve done will
matter.’
‘Thanks for the pep talk.’
‘Listen – I brought you here for some perspective. When Ragnarok comes, all bonds
will break, not just the ropes binding Fenris.
The moorings of this ship – snap. The bindings that hold me captive – snap. Whether or
not you keep that sword out of Surt’s hands,
it’s only a matter of time. One bond will snap
and they’ll all start going – unravelling like
one huge tapestry.’
‘You’re trying to discourage me? I thought
you wanted Ragnarok delayed.’
‘Oh, I do!’ He put up his hands. His wrists
were raw and bleeding, as if he’d been handcuffed too tightly. ‘I’m totally on your side,
Magnus! Look at the figureheads. The
wolves’ snouts aren’t finished yet. Is there
anything more embarrassing than sailing into battle with half-finished figureheads?’

683/1044

‘So what do you want?’
‘The same thing I’ve always wanted,’ Loki
said. ‘To help you fight your fate. Which of
the gods besides me has bothered to speak to
you as a friend and an equal?’
His eyes were like Sam’s – bright and intense, the colour of burning – but there was
something harder and more calculating
about Loki’s gaze – something that didn’t
jibe with his friendly smile. I remembered
how Sam had described him: a liar, a thief, a
murderer.
‘We’re friends now?’ I asked. ‘Equals?’
‘We could be,’ he said. ‘In fact, I have an
idea. Forget going to Fenris’s island. Forget
facing Surt. I know a place where the sword
will be safe.’
‘With you?’
Loki laughed. ‘Don’t tempt me, kid. No,
no. I was thinking about your Uncle Randolph. He understands the value of the

684/1044

sword. He’s spent his life looking for it, preparing to study it. You might not know it, but
his house is heavily fortified with magic. If
you took the sword to him … well, the old
man can’t use it himself. But he would store
it away. It would be out of Surt’s hands. And
that’s what matters, eh? It would buy us all
some time.’
I wanted to laugh in Loki’s face and tell
him no. I figured he was trying to trick me.
Yet I couldn’t see his angle.
‘You think it’s a trap,’ Loki said. ‘I get that.
But you must have wondered why Mimir told
you to take the blade to the Wolf’s island –
the very place where Surt wants to use it.
What’s the sense in that? What if Mimir is
playing you? I mean, come on. That old
severed head runs a pachinko racket! If you
don’t bring the sword to the island, Surt
won’t be able get his hands on it. Why take
the risk?’

685/1044

I struggled to clear my thoughts. ‘You’re –
you’re a smooth talker. You’d make a good
used-car salesman.’
Loki winked. ‘I think the term is preowned. You’ve got to make a choice soon,
Magnus. We may not be able to speak again.
If you want a gesture of good faith, however,
I can sweeten the deal. My daughter Hel and
I … we’ve been talking.’
My heart jackknifed. ‘Talking about …’
‘I’ll let her tell you. But now …’ He tilted
his head, listening. ‘Yes, we don’t have much
time. You might be waking up.’
‘Why were you bound?’ The question
forced itself out before I realized I was thinking it. ‘I remember you killed somebody …’
His smile hardened. The angry lines
around his eyes made him look ten years
older.
‘You know how to ruin a conversation,’
Loki said. ‘I killed Balder, the god of light –

686/1044

the handsome, perfect, incredibly annoying
son of Odin and Frigg.’ He stepped towards
me and poked my chest, emphasizing each
word. ‘And – I’d – do – it – again.’
In the back of my brain, my common sense
yelled, DROP IT! But, as you have probably
figured out by now, I don’t listen to my common sense much.
‘Why did you kill him?’
Loki barked a laugh. His breath smelled of
almonds, like cyanide. ‘Did I mention he was
annoying? Frigg was so worried about him.
The poor baby had been having bad dreams
about his own doom. Welcome to reality,
Balder! We all have bad dreams. But Frigg
couldn’t stand the idea that her precious angel might bruise his little foot. She exacted
promises from everything in creation that
nothing would hurt her beautiful son –
people, gods, trees, rocks … Can you imagine
exacting a promise from a rock? Frigg

687/1044

managed it. Afterwards, the gods had a party
to celebrate. They started throwing things at
Balder just for laughs. Arrows, swords,
boulders, each other … nothing would hurt
him. It was as if the idiot was surrounded by
a force field. Well … I’m sorry. The thought
of Mr Perfect also being Mr Invulnerable
made me sick.’
I blinked, trying to get the sting out of my
eyes. Loki’s voice was so full of hatred it
seemed to make the air burn. ‘You found a
way to kill him.’
‘Mistletoe!’ Loki’s smile brightened. ‘Can
you imagine? Frigg forgot one tiny little
plant. I fashioned a dart from the stuff, gave
it to Balder’s blind brother, a god named
Hod. I didn’t want him to miss the fun of
chucking deadly objects at Balder, so I
guided Hod’s hand and … well, Frigg’s worst
fears came true. Balder deserved it.’
‘For being too handsome and popular.’

688/1044

‘Yes!’
‘For being loved.’
‘Exactly!’ Loki leaned forward until we
were almost nose-to-nose. ‘Don’t tell me you
haven’t done the same kinds of things. Those
cars you broke into, those people you stole
from … you picked people you didn’t like,
eh? You picked the rich, handsome, stuck-up
snobs who annoyed you.’
My teeth chattered harder. ‘I never killed
anyone.’
‘Oh, please.’ Loki stepped back, examining
me with a look of disappointment. ‘It’s only a
matter of degree. So I killed a god. Big deal!
He went to Helheim and became an honoured guest in my daughter’s palace. And my
punishment? You want to know my
punishment?’
‘You were tied on a stone slab,’ I said.
‘With poison from a snake dripping on your
face. I know.’

689/1044

‘Do you?’ Loki pulled back his cuffs, showing me the raw scars on his wrists. ‘The gods
were not content to punish me with eternal
torture. They took out their wrath upon my
two favourite sons – Vali and Narvi. They
turned Vali into a wolf and watched with
amusement while he disembowelled his
brother Narvi. Then they shot and gutted the
wolf. The gods took my innocent sons’ own
entrails …’ Loki’s voice cracked with grief.
‘Well, Magnus Chase, let’s just say I was not
bound with ropes.’
Something in my chest curled up and died
– possibly my hope that there was any kind
of justice in the universe. ‘Gods.’
Loki nodded. ‘Yes, Magnus. The gods.
Think about that when you meet Thor.’
‘I’m meeting Thor?’
‘I’m afraid so. The gods don’t even pretend
to deal in good and evil, Magnus. It’s not the
Aesir way. Might makes right. So tell me …

690/1044

do you really want to charge into battle on
their behalf?’
The ship trembled under my feet. Fog
rolled across the deck.
‘Time for you to go,’ Loki said. ‘Remember
what I said. Oh, and have fun getting mouthto-mouth from a goat.’
‘Wait … what?’
Loki wiggled his fingers, his eyes full of
malicious glee. Then the ship dissolved into
grey nothingness.

FORTY-SEVEN

I Psychoanalyse a Goat

As Loki had promised, I woke up with a goat
in my face.
Confession time: my only previous experience with kissing had been with Jackie Molotov in seventh grade, behind the bleachers
at a school dance. Yes, I know that’s lame,
seeing as how I was now sixteen. But during
the past few years I’d been a little busy, living
on the street and whatnot. Anyway, with
apologies to Jackie, getting mouth-to-mouth
from a goat reminded me of her.
I rolled over and puked into the river conveniently located right next to me. My bones

693/1044

felt as if they’d been broken and mended
with duct tape. My mouth tasted like chewed
grass and old nickels.
‘Oh, you’re alive,’ said the goat. He sounded mildly disappointed.
I sat up and groaned. The goat’s horns
curved outward like the top half of an hourglass. Sticker burrs matted his shaggy brown
fur.
A lot of questions crowded into my head:
Where am I? Why are you a talking goat?
Why does your breath smell so bad? Have
you been eating spare change?
The first question that came out was:
‘Where are my friends?’
‘The elf and girl?’ asked the goat. ‘Oh,
they’re dead.’
My heart threatened to exit via my throat.
‘What? No!’

694/1044

The goat gestured with his horns. A few
yards to my right, Hearthstone and Sam lay
crumpled on the rocky beach.
I scrambled over. I placed my hands on
their throats and almost passed out again,
from relief this time.
‘They’re not dead,’ I told the goat. ‘They
both have pulses.’
‘Oh.’ The goat sighed. ‘Well, give them a
few more hours and they’ll probably be
dead.’
‘What is wrong with you?’
‘Everything,’ said the goat. ‘My whole life
is one big –’
‘Never mind,’ I said. ‘Just be quiet.’
The goat brayed. ‘Sure, I understand. You
don’t want to know my problems. No one
does. I’ll be over here, weeping or whatever.
Just ignore me.’
Keeping my hands against Sam’s and
Hearthstone’s carotid arteries, I sent warmth

695/1044

through my fingertips into their circulatory
systems.
Sam was easy to heal. Her heart was
strong. She responded almost immediately,
her eyes fluttering open, her lungs gasping
for air. She curled sideways and began
vomiting, which I took as a good sign.
Hearthstone, though … something was
wrong beyond the water in his lungs and the
cold in his limbs. Right at his core, a dense
knot of dark emotion sapped his will to live.
The pain was so intense it threw me back to
the night of my mother’s death. I remembered my hands slipping from the fire
escape, the windows of our apartment exploding above me.
Hearthstone’s grief was even worse than
that. I didn’t know exactly what he had
suffered, but his despair almost overwhelmed me. I grasped for a happy memory
– my mom and me picking wild blueberries

696/1044

on Hancock Hill, the air so clear I could see
Quincy Bay glittering on the horizon. I sent a
flood of warmth into Hearthstone’s chest.
His eyes flew open.
He stared at me, uncomprehending. Then
he pointed at my face and gestured weakly –
the sign for light.
‘What do you mean?’ I asked.
Sam groaned. She rose on one arm and
squinted at me. ‘Magnus … why are you
glowing?’
I looked at my hands. Sure enough, I
seemed to have been dipped in Folkvanger
light. The warm buttery aura was starting to
fade, but I could feel residual power tingling
along my arm hairs.
‘Apparently,’ I said, ‘if I heal too much at
once, I glow.’
Sam winced. ‘Well, thanks for healing us.
But try not to self-combust. How is Hearth?’

697/1044

I helped him sit up. ‘How you feeling,
buddy?’
He made a circle with his thumb and
middle finger, then flicked it upward, the
sign for terrible.
No surprise. Given the depth of pain I’d
felt within him, I was surprised he wasn’t
constantly screaming.
‘Hearth …’ I started to say, ‘when I healed
you, I –’
He put his hands over mine – a sign-language version of hush.
Maybe we had some residual connection
from the healing magic, but when I met
Hearthstone’s eyes I could tell what he was
thinking. His message was an almost audible
voice in my head – like when Jack the sword
had started to speak.
Later, Hearth told me. Thank you …
brother.
I was too startled to reply.

698/1044

The goat plodded over. ‘You really should
take better care of your elf. They need lots of
sunshine – not this weak Jotunheim light.
And you can’t overwater them by drowning
them in rivers.’
Hearthstone frowned. He signed, The goat
is speaking?
I tried to clear my head. ‘Uh, yeah, he is.’
‘I also read sign language,’ said the goat.
‘My name is Tanngnjóstr, which means
Teeth Grinder, because … well, it’s a nervous
habit of mine. But nobody calls me Tanngnjóstr. It’s a horrible name. Just call me
Otis.’
Sam struggled to her feet. Her hijab had
come undone and now hung around her neck
like a gunslinger’s bandanna. ‘So, Otis, what
brings you here to this place that is …
wherever we are?’
Otis sighed. ‘I got lost. Which is typical. I
was trying to find my way back to camp

699/1044

when I found you all instead. I suppose you’ll
kill me and eat me for dinner now.’
I frowned at Sam. ‘Were you planning to
kill the goat?’
‘No. Were you?’
I looked at Otis. ‘We weren’t planning to
kill you.’
‘It’s okay if you want to,’ Otis said. ‘I’m
used to it. My master kills me all the time.’
‘He … does?’ I asked.
‘Oh, sure. I’m basically a talking meal on
four hooves. My therapist says that’s why I’m
so down all the time, but I don’t know. I
think it goes way back to when I was a kid –’
‘Sorry. Wait. Who is your master?’
Hearthstone spelled out: T-H-O-R. D-UH.
‘That’s right,’ said the goat. ‘Although his
last name is not Duh. You haven’t seen him,
have you?’

700/1044

‘No …’ I thought about my dream. I could
still smell the bitter almonds on Loki’s
breath. The gods don’t even pretend to deal
in good and evil, Magnus. Think about that
when you meet Thor.
Junior had told us to seek out Thor. The
river had somehow brought us to where we
needed to be. Only now, I wasn’t sure I
wanted to be here.
Sam readjusted her headscarf. ‘I’m not a
big fan of Thor, but if he can give us directions to Lyngvi we need to talk to him.’
‘Except the goat is lost,’ I said. ‘So how do
we find Thor?’
Hearthstone pointed to my pendant. Ask
Jack.
Instead of spelling the name, he made the
sign for jack-in-the-box, which looked like a
finger rabbit popping up from behind his
hand. Sometimes sign language can be a
little too literal.

701/1044

I pulled off the pendant. The sword grew
to full length and began to hum.
‘Hey,’ said Jack, the runes glowing along
his blade, ‘glad you survived! Oh, is that Otis? Cool! Thor must be around here
somewhere.’
Otis bleated. ‘You have a talking sword?
I’ve never been killed by a talking sword before. That’s fine. If you could just make a
clean cut right across the throat –’
‘Otis!’ Jack said. ‘Don’t you know me? I’m
Frey’s sword, Sumarbrander. We met at that
party at Bilskirner – the one where you were
playing tug-of-war with Loki?’
‘Oh …’ Otis shook his horns. ‘Yes. That was
embarrassing.’
‘Jack,’ I said, ‘we’re looking for Thor. Any
chance you can point us in the right
direction?’

702/1044

‘Easy McSqueezy.’ The sword tugged at my
arm. ‘I’m reading a big concentration of hot
air and thunder that way!’
Sam and I helped Hearthstone to his feet.
He wasn’t looking too good. His lips were
pale green. He wobbled like he’d just got off
a Tilt-a-Whirl.
‘Otis,’ Sam said, ‘can our friend ride you?
It might be quicker.’
‘Sure,’ the goat said. ‘Ride me, kill me,
whatever. But I should warn you, this is Jotunheim. If we go the wrong way, we’ll run
across giants. Then we’ll all be butchered and
put in a stew pot.’
‘We won’t go the wrong way,’ I promised.
‘Will we, Jack?’
‘Hmm?’ said the sword. ‘Oh, no. Probably
not. Like, a sixty per cent chance we’ll live.’
‘Jack …’
‘Kidding,’ he said. ‘Jeez, so uptight.’

703/1044

He pointed upstream and led us through
the foggy morning, with spotty snow flurries
and a forty per cent chance of death.

FORTY-EIGHT

Hearthstone Passes Out
Even More than Jason
Grace (Though I Have No
Idea Who That Is)

Jotunheim looked a lot like Vermont, just
with fewer signs offering maple-syrup
products. Snow dusted the dark mountains.
Waist-high drifts choked the valleys. Pine
trees bristled with icicles. Jack hovered in
front, guiding us along the river as it zigzagged through canyons blanketed in subzero shadows. We climbed trails next to half-

706/1044

frozen waterfalls, my sweat chilling instantly
against my skin.
In other words, it was a huge amount of
fun.
Sam and I stayed close to Hearthstone. I
hoped my residual aura of Frey-glow might
do him some good, but he still looked pretty
weak. The best we could do was keep him
from sliding off the goat.
‘Hang in there,’ I told him.
He signed something – maybe sorry – but
his gesture was so listless I wasn’t sure.
‘Just rest,’ I said.
He grunted in frustration. He groped
through his bag of runes, pulled one out and
placed it in my hands. He pointed to the
stone, then to himself, as if to say, This is me.
The rune was one I didn’t know:

707/1044

Sam frowned when she saw it. ‘That’s
perthro.’
‘What does it mean?’ I asked.
She glanced cautiously at Hearth. ‘Are you
trying to explain what happened to you? You
want Magnus to know?’
Hearthstone took a deep breath, like he
was preparing for a sprint. He signed, Magnus – felt – pain.
I closed my fingers around the stone. ‘Yeah
… When I healed you, there was something
dark –’
Hearth pointed again at the stone. He
looked at Sam.
‘You want me to tell him?’ she asked. ‘You
sure?’
He nodded, then rested his head against
the goat’s back and closed his eyes.
We walked for about twenty yards before
Sam said anything.

708/1044

‘When Hearth and I were in Alfheim,’ she
started, ‘he told me part of his story. I don’t
know all the details, but … his parents …’ She
struggled to find words.
Otis the goat bleated. ‘Go on. I love depressing stories.’
‘Be quiet,’ Sam ordered.
‘I’ll just be quiet, then,’ the goat agreed.
I studied Hearthstone’s face. He looked so
peaceful asleep. ‘Blitzen told me a little bit,’ I
said. ‘Hearth’s parents never accepted him,
because he was deaf.’
‘It was worse than that,’ Sam said. ‘They
were … not good people.’
Some of Loki’s acidic tone crept into her
voice, as if she were imagining Hearth’s parents on the receiving end of mistletoe darts.
‘Hearth had a brother – Andiron – who died
very young. It wasn’t Hearthstone’s fault, but
his parents took out their bitterness on him.
They always told him the wrong brother had

709/1044

died. To them, Hearth was a disappointment, a disabled elf, a punishment from the
gods. He could do no right.’
I clenched the runestone. ‘He still carries
all that pain inside. Gods …’
Sam laid her hand on Hearth’s ankle. ‘He
couldn’t tell me the details of how he grew
up, but I – I got the feeling it was worse than
you can imagine.’
I looked at the rune. ‘No wonder he daydreamed about working magic. But this
symbol …?’
‘Perthro symbolizes an empty cup lying
sideways,’ Sam said. ‘It could be spilled
drink, or a cup waiting to be filled, or a cup
for throwing dice, like fate.’
‘I don’t understand.’
Sam brushed some goat hair from Hearthstone’s trouser cuff. ‘I think … I think perthro is the rune Hearthstone personally
relates to. When he went to Mimir and drank

710/1044

from the well, Hearthstone was offered a
choice between two futures. If he took the
first path, Mimir would grant him speech
and hearing and send him back to Alfheim to
live a normal life, but he would have to give
up his dream of magic. If he chose the
second path –’
‘He’d learn magic,’ I guessed, ‘but he
would stay the way he is – deaf, hated by his
own parents. What kind of messed-up choice
is that? I should’ve stepped on Mimir’s face
when I had the chance.’
Sam shook her head. ‘Mimir just presented the choices. Magic and normal life are
mutually exclusive. Only people who have
known great pain have the capacity to learn
magic. They have to be like hollow cups.
Even Odin … he gave up an eye to drink from
Mimir’s well, but that was just the beginning.
In order to learn the runes, Odin fashioned a

711/1044

noose and hanged himself from a branch of
the World Tree for nine days.’
My stomach checked to see if it had anything left to retch. It settled for dry spasms.
‘That’s … not right.’
‘But it was necessary,’ Sam said. ‘Odin
pierced his side with his own spear and hung
there in pain, without food or water, until the
runes revealed themselves. The pain made
him hollow … a receptacle for magic.’
I looked at Hearthstone. I wasn’t sure
whether to hug him or wake him up and
scold him. How could anyone willingly
choose to hold on to that much pain? What
kind of magic could possibly be worth the
cost?
‘I’ve done magic,’ I said. ‘Healing, walking
into flames, blasting weapons out of people’s
hands. But I’ve never suffered like Hearth
has.’

712/1044

Samirah pursed her lips. ‘That’s different,
Magnus. You were born with your magic –
an inheritance from your father. You can’t
choose your abilities or change them. Alf
seidr is innate. It’s also lesser magic compared to what the runes can do.’
‘Lesser?’ I didn’t want to argue about
whose magic was more impressive, but most
of the things I’d seen Hearthstone do had
been pretty … subtle.
‘I told you back in Valhalla,’ Sam said, ‘the
runes are the secret language of the universe.
Learning them, you can recode reality. The
only limits on your magic are your strength
and your imagination.’
‘So why don’t more people learn runes?’
‘That’s what I’ve been telling you. It requires incredible sacrifice. Most people
would die before they got as far as Hearthstone has.’

713/1044

I tucked Hearthstone’s scarf around his
neck. I understood now why he’d been willing to risk rune magic. To a guy with his
troubled past, recoding reality must have
sounded pretty good. I also thought about
the message he’d whispered into my mind.
He’d called me brother. After everything
Hearthstone had been through with his own
brother’s death … that could not have been
easy.
‘So Hearth made himself an empty cup,’ I
said. ‘Like perthro.’
‘Trying to fill himself with the power of
magic,’ Sam agreed. ‘I don’t know all the
meanings of perthro, Magnus. But I do know
one thing – Hearthstone cast it when we
were falling from the cliff into the river.’
I tried to remember, but I’d been overwhelmed with exhaustion as soon as I
gripped the sword. ‘What did it do?’

714/1044

‘It got us here,’ Sam said. ‘And it left
Hearthstone like that.’ She nodded to his
snoring form. ‘I can’t be sure, but I think
perthro is his … what do Christians call it? A
“Hail Mary pass”. He was throwing that rune
like you’d throw dice from a cup, turning our
fate over to the gods.’
My palm was now bruised from clenching
the stone. I still wasn’t sure why Hearthstone
had given it to me, but I felt a strong instinct
to keep it for him – if only temporarily. No
one should carry that kind of fate alone. I
slipped the rune into my pocket.
We trekked through the wilderness in silence for a while. At one point, Jack led us
over the river on a fallen tree trunk. I
couldn’t help looking both ways for giant
squirrels before crossing.
In places the snow was so deep we had to
hop from boulder to boulder while Otis the

715/1044

goat speculated about which one of us would
slip, fall and die first.
‘I wish you’d be quiet,’ I muttered. ‘I also
wish we had snowshoes.’
‘You’d need Uller for that,’ said the goat.
‘Who?’
‘The god of snowshoes,’ said Otis. ‘He invented them. Also archery and … I don’t
know, other stuff.’
I’d never heard of a snowshoe god. But I
would’ve paid real money if the god of snowmobiles had come roaring out of the woods
right then to give us a lift.
We kept trudging along.
Once, we spotted a stone house on the
summit of a hill. The grey light and the
mountains played tricks with my perception.
I couldn’t tell if the house was small and
nearby, or massive and far away. I remembered what my friends had told me

716/1044

about giants – that they lived and breathed
illusions.
‘See that house?’ Jack said. ‘Let’s not go
there.’
I didn’t argue.
Judging time was difficult, but by late afternoon the river had turned into a raging
current. Cliffs rose along the opposite bank.
In the distance, through the trees, I heard
the roar of a waterfall.
‘Oh, that’s right,’ said Otis. ‘I remember
now.’
‘You remember what?’ I asked.
‘Why I left. I was supposed to get help for
my master.’
Sam brushed a clump of snow off her
shoulder. ‘Why would Thor need help?’
‘The rapids,’ said Otis. ‘I guess we’d better
hurry. I was supposed be quick, but I stood
watching you guys for almost a day.’

717/1044

I flinched. ‘Wait … we were unconscious
for a whole day?’
‘At least,’ said Otis.
‘He’s right,’ Jack said. ‘According to my internal clock, it’s Sunday the nineteenth. I
warned you, once you took hold of me …
well, we fought those dwarves on Friday. You
slept all the way through Saturday.’
Sam grimaced. ‘We’ve lost valuable time.
The Wolf’s island will appear in three more
days, and we don’t even know where Blitzen
is.’
‘Probably my fault,’ Otis offered. ‘I
should’ve saved you earlier, but giving a
human mouth-to-mouth – I had to work up
my nerve. My therapist gave me some
breathing exercises –’
‘Guys,’ Jack the sword interrupted, ‘we’re
close now. For real this time.’ He hovered off
through the woods.

718/1044

We followed the floating sword until the
trees parted. In front of us stretched a beach
of jagged black rocks and chunks of ice. On
the opposite bank, sheer cliffs rose into the
sky. The river had turned into full-on classfive rapids – a combat zone of white-water
and half-submerged boulders. Upstream, the
river was compressed between two
skyscraper-size stone columns – man-made
or natural, I couldn’t tell. Their tops were
lost in the clouds. From the fissure between
them, the river blasted out in a vertical sheet
– less like a waterfall and more like a dam
splitting down the middle.
Suddenly Jotunheim did not seem like
Vermont. It seemed more like the Himalayas
– someplace not meant for mortals.
It was hard to focus on anything except the
raging falls, but eventually I noticed a small
campsite on the beach – a tent, a fire pit and
a second goat with dark fur pacing nervously

719/1044

on the shore. When the goat saw us, he came
galloping over.
Otis turned to us and shouted over the
roar of the river, ‘This is Marvin! He’s my
brother! His proper name is Tanngrisnr –
Snarler – but –’
‘Otis!’ Marvin yelled. ‘Where have you
been?’
‘I forgot what I was doing,’ said Otis.
Marvin bleated in exasperation. His lips
were curled in a permanent snarl, which –
gee, I dunno – might have been how he got
the name Snarler.
‘This is the help you found?’ Marvin fixed
his yellow eyes on me. ‘Two scrawny humans
and a dead elf?’
‘He’s not dead!’ I yelled. ‘Where is Thor?’
‘In the river!’ Marvin pointed with his
horns. ‘The god of thunder is about to
drown, and if you don’t figure out a way to

720/1044

help him I’ll kill you. By the way, nice to
meet you.’

FORTY-NINE

Well, There’s Your
Problem. You’ve Got a
Sword Up Your Nose

I couldn’t help it.
When I heard the name Thor, I thought
about the guy from the movies and comics –
a big superhero from outer space, with bright
Spandex tights, a red cape, goldilocks hair
and maybe a helmet with fluffy little dove
wings.
In real life, Thor was scarier. And redder.
And grungier.

723/1044

Also, he could cuss like a drunken, creative
sailor.
‘Mother-grubbing scum bucket!’ he yelled.
(Or something along those lines. My brain
may have filtered the actual language, as it
would’ve made my ears bleed.) ‘Where is my
backup?’
He stood chest-deep in the flood near the
opposite side, clinging to a scrubby bush that
grew from the cliff. The rock was so smooth
and slick there were no other handholds. The
bush looked like it was about to pull free of
its roots. Any minute, Thor was going to get
flushed downstream, where rows of jagged
rocks shredded the current in a series of
cataracts, perfect for making a Thor
smoothie.
From this distance, through the spray of
water and mist, I couldn’t see much of the
god himself: shoulder-length red hair, a
curly red beard and bodybuilder arms

724/1044

protruding from a sleeveless leather jerkin.
He wore dark iron gauntlets that reminded
me of robot hands, and a chain-mail waistcoat Blitzen would’ve found very trendy.
‘Beard-burning son of a mud-lover!’
roared the god. ‘Otis, is that you? Where’s
my artillery? My air support? Where the Helheim is my cavalry?’
‘I’m here, boss!’ Otis called. ‘I brought …
two kids and a dead elf!’
‘He’s not dead,’ I said again.
‘A half-dead elf,’ Otis corrected.
‘What good is that?’ Thor bellowed. ‘I need
that giantess killed, and I need her killed
NOW!’
‘Giantess?’ I asked.
Marvin headbutted me. ‘That one, stupid.’
He nodded towards the waterfall. For a
moment, the fog cleared from the tops of the
cliffs, and I saw the problem.

725/1044

Next to me, Sam made a sound like she
was being garroted. ‘Holy Heimdall.’
Those skyscraper-size pillars of rock were
actually legs – immense legs so grey and
rough they blended in with the surrounding
cliffs. The rest of the woman was so tall she
made Godzilla look like a toy poodle. She
made the Sears Tower look like a traffic
cone. Her thigh-length dress was stitched together from so many animal hides it probably represented the extinction of several
dozen species. Her face, somewhere up there
in the stratosphere, was as stony and grim as
a Mount Rushmore president’s, surrounded
by a hurricane of long dark hair. She gripped
the clifftops on either side of the river as if
straddling the torrent was hard even for her.
She looked down, smiling cruelly at the
little speck of thunder god caught in the current, then squeezed her legs closer together.
The waterfall sprayed out between her shins

726/1044

in a highly pressurized curtain of liquid
force.
Thor tried to shout but got a mouthful of
river. His head went under. The bush he was
clinging to bent sideways, its roots snapping
one after the other.
‘She’s going to wash him into oblivion!’
Marvin said. ‘Do something, humans!’
Like what? I thought.
‘He’s a god,’ I said. ‘Can’t he fly? Can’t he
zap her with lightning or – what about his
hammer? Doesn’t he have a hammer?’
Marvin snarled. He was very good at
snarling. ‘Gee, why didn’t we think of that? If
Thor could do any of those things without
losing his grip and getting instantly killed,
don’t you think he would’ve done it by now?’
I wanted to ask how a god could get killed,
since they were supposed to be immortal.
Then I thought about Mimir existing forever
as a severed head, and Balder getting cut

727/1044

down by a mistletoe dart and spending
eternity down in Hel World.
I looked at Sam.
She shrugged helplessly. ‘Against a giant
that big, I have nothing.’
Hearthstone mumbled in his sleep. His
eyelids were starting to flutter, but he wasn’t
going to be casting magic anytime soon.
That left me only one friend to call on.
‘Jack.’
The sword hovered next to me. ‘Yeah?’
‘You see that massive giantess blocking the
river?’
‘Technically speaking,’ Jack said, ‘I can’t
see anything, because I don’t have eyes. But,
yes, I see the giant.’
‘You think you could fly up there and, I
dunno, kill her?’
Jack hummed indignantly. ‘You want me
to kill a two-thousand-foot-tall giantess?’
‘Yeah.’

728/1044

‘Well, here’s the thing. You’d need to grab
me and throw me like you’ve never thrown
anything before. You’d need to really believe
that killing this giantess is a worthy deed.
And you’d need to be prepared for what will
happen when you take hold of me again.
How much energy would it take you, personally, to climb that two-thousand-foot-tall giant and kill her?’
The effort would probably destroy me, I
thought. But I didn’t see much choice.
We needed information from Thor. Sam
and Hearthstone and two antisocial talking
goats were depending on me.
‘Let’s do it.’ I grabbed the sword.
I tried to focus. I didn’t care so much
about saving Thor. I didn’t even know the
guy. Nor did I particularly care why a halfmile-tall giantess thought it was funny to
stand in a river and spray a waterfall
between her shins.

729/1044

But I did care about Sam, Blitzen and
Hearthstone. They’d risked their lives to get
me this far. No matter what Loki promised, I
had to find a way to stop Surt and keep Fenris Wolf chained. The Wolf had caused my
mother’s death. Mimir had said that Fenris
sent his two children … They were supposed
to kill me. My mom had sacrificed her life to
keep me alive. I had to make her sacrifice
mean something.
The huge grey giantess represented
everything that was in my way. She had to
go.
With every bit of my strength, I threw the
sword.
Jack sliced skyward like a rocket-powered
boomerang.
What happened next … well, I wasn’t sure
I saw correctly. It was a long way up. But it
looked like Jack flew into the giantess’s left
nostril.

730/1044

The giantess arched her back. She made a
face like she was going to sneeze. Her hands
slipped from the clifftops. Jack flew out of
her right nostril as the giantess’s knees
buckled and she fell towards us.
‘Timber!’ Jack yelled, spiralling back to
me.
‘RUN!’ I screamed.
Too late. The giantess face-planted in the
river with a mighty FLOOM!
I have no memory of the wall of water that
washed me into a tree, along with Sam, a
half-asleep Hearthstone and the two startled
goats. Nevertheless, that’s what must have
happened. By sheer luck, none of us died.
The giantess’s body had completely
changed the topography. Where there had
been a river, there was now a wide icy marsh,
with water gurgling and spluttering around
Dead Lady Island as it tried to find new ways
to get downstream. The beach was six inches

731/1044

underwater. Thor’s campsite had vanished.
The god himself was nowhere to be seen.
‘You killed Thor!’ Otis bleated. ‘You
dropped a giantess on him!’
The giantess’s right arm twitched. I almost
fell out of the tree. I was afraid Jack had only
stunned her, but then Thor wriggled his way
out of the giantess’s armpit with much cursing and grunting.
Sam and I helped Hearthstone out of the
tree as the god of thunder trudged across the
giantess’s back, jumped into the marsh and
waded towards us. His eyes were blue,
rimmed with angry red. His expression was
so fierce it would’ve sent wild boars running
for their mommies.
Jack the sword appeared at my side,
glistening with various types of goo typically
found in a giant’s nostril.
‘So what do you think, señor?’ His runes
glowed. ‘You proud of me?’

732/1044

‘I’ll answer that if I survive the next two
minutes.’
The angry god stopped in front of me.
Water dripped from his red beard onto his
extremely large chain-mail-clad chest. His
pot-roast-size fists were clenched in their
iron gauntlets.
‘That –’ he cracked a grin – ‘was amazing!’
He clapped me on the shoulder so hard he
dislocated several joints. ‘Join me for dinner!
We can kill Otis and Marvin!’

FIFTY

No Spoilers. Thor Is Way
Behind on His Shows

Yep. we killed the goats.
Thor promised they would be resurrected
good as new the next morning, so long as we
didn’t break any bones. Otis assured me frequent death was good for his exposure therapy. Marvin growled at me to get on with it
and not be a weak-kneed wimp.
It was a lot easier killing Marvin.
After two years of homelessness, I thought
I knew how tough it could be to keep myself
fed, but let me tell you: killing and

735/1044

butchering an animal for my own supper was
a new experience. You think it’s gross to pull
a half-eaten sandwich out of a bin? Try skinning a goat, cutting it into chunks, building a
fire, then cooking the meat on a spit while attempting to ignore the goat heads staring at
you from the scrap pile.
You might assume that kind of experience
would turn me into a vegetarian. But nope.
As soon as I smelled the cooking meat, my
hunger took over. I forgot all about the horrors of goat slaughter. Those Otis-kebabs
were the best things I ever tasted.
As we ate, Thor chatted about giants, Jotunheim and his opinions of Midgard television shows, which, for some reason, he followed religiously. (Can I say a god did
something religiously?)
‘Giants!’ He shook his head in disgust.
‘After all these centuries, you’d think they
would learn to stop invading Midgard. But

736/1044

no! They’re like the … what is it? The League
of Assassins in Arrow! They just keep coming back! As if I would let anything happen
to humans! You guys are my favourite
species!’
He patted my cheek. Fortunately, he had
taken off his iron gloves, or he would’ve
broken my jaw. Unfortunately, he hadn’t
washed his hands after gutting the goats.
Hearthstone sat at the fire, nibbling on a
piece of Marvin haunch. He was getting
some of his strength back, though every time
I looked at him I had to force myself not to
sob. I wanted to hug the poor guy, bake him
a batch of cookies and tell him how sorry I
was about his crappy childhood, but I knew
he wouldn’t want pity. He wouldn’t want me
to start treating him differently.
Still … the empty-cup runestone weighed
heavily in my coat pocket.

737/1044

Sam stayed at the edge of the fire, as far
from Thor as she could get. She said as little
as possible and made no sudden movements,
which meant that most of Thor’s attention
was on me.
Everything the thunder god did, he did
with gusto. He loved cooking his goats. He
loved eating and drinking mead. He loved
telling stories. And he loved farting. Boy, did
he love farting. When he got excited, sparks
of electricity flew from his hands, his ears
and … well, I’ll leave the rest to your
imagination.
Unlike his movie version, there was nothing polished about Thor. His face was handsome in a beat-up way, like he’d spent years
in the boxing ring. His chain mail was filthy.
His leather jerkin and trousers had worn to
the colour of dirty snow. Tattoos covered his
muscular arms. On his left biceps, SIF was inscribed inside a heart. Around his right

738/1044

forearm coiled a stylized World Serpent.
Across his knuckles on either hand, in block
letters, were the names MAGNI and MODI. At
first I was nervous about the name Magni,
because it was so close to Magnus – the last
thing I wanted was my name printed across
the thunder god’s fist – but Sam assured me,
quietly, that it was a totally different name.
Thor regaled me with his theories about a
hypothetical death match between Daryl
from The Walking Dead and Mike from
Breaking Bad. Back when I was hanging out
on the sidewalks of Boston, I would’ve been
happy to talk TV for hours just to pass the
time, but now I had a quest looming. We’d
lost a whole day to unconsciousness. Speculating on the new autumn line-up wasn’t going to mean much if the world was consumed
in flames three days from now.
Still, Thor was having so much fun it was
hard to change the subject.

739/1044

‘So what do think?’ he asked. ‘Best villain
in an ongoing series?’
‘Uh … wow, tough one.’ I pointed at his
knuckles. ‘Who are Magni and Modi?’
‘My sons!’ Thor beamed. With the goat
grease in his beard and the random electrical
sparks flying from his fingers, I was worried
he might set himself on fire. ‘I’ve got a lot of
sons, of course, but they’re my favourites.’
‘Yeah?’ I asked. ‘How old are they?’
He frowned. ‘Ah, this is embarrassing, but
I’m not sure. They might not even be born
yet.’
‘How –?’
‘Magnus,’ Sam interrupted, ‘Lord Thor’s
two sons Magni and Modi are fated to survive Ragnarok. Their names are spoken in
the prophecies of the Norns.’
‘That’s right!’ Thor leaned towards Sam.
‘Who are you again?’
‘Uh … Sam, my lord.’

740/1044

‘You have a familiar aura, girl.’ The god
furrowed his red eyebrows. ‘Why is that?’
‘I was a Valkyrie …?’ Sam inched
backwards.
‘Oh. Maybe that’s it.’ Thor shrugged.
‘You’ll have to excuse me. I’ve been on three
thousand, five hundred and six consecutive
deployments to the eastern front, keeping
the giants at bay. I get a little jumpy
sometimes.’
Hearthstone signed, And gassy.
Thor belched. ‘What did the elf say? I do
not speak Gesticulation.’
‘Um, he was wondering how you keep current on television,’ I said, ‘seeing as you’re
out in the field so much.’
Thor laughed. ‘I have to do something to
keep myself sane!’
Hearthstone signed, How’s that working
out for you?

741/1044

‘The elf agrees!’ Thor guessed. ‘I can watch
my shows anywhere, or at least I could.
Among its many other powers, my hammer
Mjolnir got full bars of service and HD resolution in any of the Nine Worlds!’
‘Got, past tense?’ Sam asked.
Thor cleared his throat loudly. ‘But enough
about television! How’s that goat meat? You
didn’t break any bones, did you?’
Sam and I exchanged looks. When we’d
first introduced ourselves to the god, I’d
found it strange that Thor didn’t have his
hammer. It was sort of his signature weapon.
I’d figured maybe it was just in disguise, like
my sword. Now I was starting to wonder. His
piercing bloodshot gaze made me think it
might be dangerous to ask, though.
‘Uh, no, sir,’ I said. ‘We didn’t break any
bones. Just theoretically, what would happen
if we did?’

742/1044

‘The goats would be resurrected with that
damage,’ he said. ‘Which would take a long
time to heal and be very annoying. Then I’d
either have to kill you or make you my slave
forever.’
Hearthstone signed, This god is a freak.
‘You’re right, Mr Elf,’ Thor said. ‘It is a fair
and just punishment! That’s how I got my
regular manservant, Thjalfi.’ Thor shook his
head. ‘Poor kid. These deployments were
starting to get to him. I had to grant him a
furlough. I really could use another slave …’
He studied me appraisingly.
‘So …’ I set aside my goat meat. ‘How did
you end up in the river, and why was that giantess trying to drown you?’
‘Oh, her.’ Thor glowered at the
neighbourhood-size corpse in the middle of
the icy swamp. ‘She’s a daughter of Geirrod,
one of my old enemies. I hate that guy. He’s
always sending his daughters to kill me.’ He

743/1044

gestured towards the cliffs. ‘I was heading to
his fortress to see if – Well, no matter. Thank
you for the assist. That was Frey’s sword,
wasn’t it?’
‘Yes. Jack’s around here somewhere.’ I
whistled. Jack came hovering over.
‘Hello, Thor,’ said the sword. ‘Long time
no see.’
‘Ha!’ The god clapped his hands in delight.
‘I thought I recognized you. But isn’t your
name Sumarbrander? Why did the human
call you Jorvik?’
‘Jack,’ the sword corrected.
‘Yak.’
‘No,’ the sword said patiently. ‘Jack, with
the English jay sound.’
‘Okay, fine. Well, nice job with the
giantess.’
‘You know what they say.’ Jack sounded
smug. ‘The bigger they are, the easier it is to
fly up their nasal cavity.’

744/1044

‘True,’ Thor said. ‘But I thought you were
lost. How did you come to be with these
strange folk?’
He calls us strange? Hearthstone signed.
‘Lord Thor,’ Sam said, ‘we actually came
here looking for you. We need your help, as
Magnus will now explain.’ She stared at me
like, If he knows what’s good for him.
I told Thor about the Norns’ prophecy –
nine days hence, sun going east, Surt explodes everything, Fenris Wolf, nasty teeth,
eats world, et cetera.
Thor became agitated. Sparks flew from
his elbows. He rose and paced around the
fire, occasionally punching nearby trees.
‘You want me to tell you where the island
is,’ he deduced.
‘That would be great,’ I said.
‘But I can’t,’ Thor muttered to himself. ‘I
can’t be sending random mortals on wolfwatching tours. Too dangerous. But

745/1044

Ragnarok. Not ready. No. Not unless –’ He
froze, then turned towards us with an eager
gleam in his eyes. ‘Perhaps that’s why you’re
here.’
I do not like this, Hearthstone signed.
Thor nodded. ‘The elf agrees! You have
come to assist me!’
‘Exactly!’ said Jack, humming with excitement. ‘Let’s do it, whatever it is!’
I had a sudden desire to hide behind the
goat carcasses. Anything the god of thunder
and the Sword of Summer agreed on, I didn’t
want to be part of.
Sam placed her axe at her side, as if she
anticipated needing it soon. ‘Let me guess,
Lord Thor: you’ve lost your hammer again.’
‘Now, I did not say that!’ Thor wagged a
finger at her. ‘You did not hear that from me.
Because if that were true, hypothetically
speaking, and if word got out, the giants
would invade Midgard immediately! You

746/1044

mortals don’t realize how often I keep you
safe. My reputation alone makes most giants
too afraid to attack your world.’
‘Back up,’ I said. ‘What did Sam mean by
again? You’ve lost your hammer before?’
‘Once,’ Thor said. ‘Okay, twice. Three
times if you count this time, which you
shouldn’t, because I am not admitting that
the hammer is missing.’
‘Right …’ I said. ‘So how did you lose it?’
‘I don’t know!’ Thor started to pace again,
his long red hair sparking and popping. ‘It
was just like … Poof! I tried retracing my
steps. I tried the Find My Hammer app, but
it doesn’t work!’
‘Isn’t your hammer the most powerful
weapon in the universe?’ I asked.
‘Yes!’
‘And I thought it was so heavy nobody except you could pick it up.’

747/1044

‘True. Even I need my iron gloves of
strength to lift it! But giants are tricky.
They’re big and strong and they have magic.
With them, many impossible things are
possible.’
I thought about the eagle Big Boy and how
easily he’d suckered me. ‘Yeah, I get it. Is
that why you were going to A-Rod’s?’
‘Geirrod’s,’ Thor corrected. ‘And, yes. He’s
a likely suspect. Even if he doesn’t have it, he
might know who does. Besides, without my
hammer, I can’t watch my shows. I’m a season behind on Sherlock and it’s killing me! I
was ready to go to Geirrod’s fortress myself,
but I’m very glad you volunteered to go for
me!’
We did? Hearthstone asked.
‘That’s the spirit, Mr Elf! I’m glad you are
ready to die for my cause!’
Really not, Hearth signed.

748/1044

‘Just go to Geirrod’s fortress and check for
my hammer. Of course it’s important you
don’t let on that it is missing. If Geirrod
doesn’t have it, we don’t want him to know
that I don’t have it. But, you know, if he
doesn’t have it, obviously ask him if he
knows who does, without actually admitting
that it’s missing.’
Samirah pressed her fingers to her
temples. ‘I’m getting a headache. Lord Thor,
how are we supposed to find your hammer if
we can’t mention –’
‘You’ll figure it out!’ he said. ‘You humans
are a clever bunch. Then, once you’ve determined the truth, I will know you are
worthy of facing Fenris Wolf. I’ll give you the
location of his island and you can stop Ragnarok. You help me, I help you.’
It sounded more like You help me, then
you help me some more, but I doubted there

749/1044

was a polite way to decline without getting
an iron gauntlet in my teeth.
Sam must have been thinking the same
thing. Her face turned roughly the same
shade of green as her hijab. ‘Lord Thor,’ she
said, ‘invading a giant’s fortress with only
three people would be …’
Suicidal, Hearthstone suggested. Stupid.
‘Difficult,’ Sam said.
Just then, a nearby pine tree shuddered.
Blitzen dropped from the branches and
landed waist-deep in a pile of slush.
Hearthstone scrambled over and helped
him to his feet.
‘Thanks, buddy,’ Blitz said. ‘Stupid tree
travel. Where –?’
‘Is this a friend of yours?’ Thor raised one
ironclad fist. ‘Or should I –’
‘No! I mean, yes, he’s a friend. Blitzen,
Thor. Thor, Blitzen.’

750/1044

‘The Thor?’ Blitzen bowed so low it looked
like he was trying to avoid an air strike.
‘Honoured. Seriously. Hi. Wow.’
‘Well, then!’ The thunder god grinned.
‘You have four people to storm the giant’s
citadel! Friend dwarf, help yourself to my
goat meat and my fire. As for me, after being
stuck in that river so long, I’m going to turn
in early. In the morning, you all can set off to
find my hammer, which of course is not officially missing!’
Thor tromped over to his bed of furs,
threw himself down and began snoring with
as much gusto as he’d been farting.
Blitzen frowned at me. ‘What have you got
us into?’
‘Long story,’ I said. ‘Here, have some
Marvin.’

FIFTY-ONE

We Have the
k-About-Turning-Into-Horsef
Chat

Hearthstone went to sleep first, mostly because he was the only one who could sleep
with Thor’s snoring. Since the god had
crashed outside, Hearthstone commandeered the two-man tent. He crawled inside
and promptly collapsed.
The rest of us stayed up and talked around
the campfire. At first I was worried we might
wake Thor, but I soon realized we could’ve
tap-danced around his head, banged gongs,

753/1044

shouted his name and set off large explosions, and he would’ve slept right through it.
I wondered if that was how he had lost his
hammer. The giants could’ve waited until he
was asleep, backed up a couple of industrial
cranes and done the job easy.
As night fell, I was grateful for the fire. The
darkness was more complete than in the
wildest places my mom and I had ever
camped. Wolves howled in the forest, which
gave me a bad case of the shivers. Wind
moaned through the canyons like a chorus of
zombies.
I mentioned this to Blitzen, but he set me
straight.
‘No, kid,’ he said. ‘Norse zombies are
called draugr. They move silently. You’d
never hear them coming.’
‘Thanks,’ I said. ‘That’s a huge relief.’
Blitzen stirred his cup of goat stew, though
he didn’t seem interested in tasting it. He’d

754/1044

changed into a blue wool suit with a creamcoloured trench coat, perhaps so he could
blend in with the Jotunheim snow in the
most stylish way possible. He’d also brought
each of us a new supply pack filled with fresh
winter clothes, which of course he’d sized
perfectly just by guessing. Sometimes it pays
to have a friend who’s a thoughtful clothes
horse.
Blitz explained how he’d delivered the earrings to his mother, then had been detained
in Folkvanger for various duties as Freya’s
representative: judging an oyster bake, refereeing a volleyball game, serving as guest of
honour at the 678th annual ukulele festival.
‘It was murder,’ he said. ‘Mom liked the
earrings. Didn’t ask how I got them. Didn’t
want to hear about the contest with Junior.
She just said, “Oh, don’t you wish you could
do work like this, Blitzen?” ’ From his coat
pocket, he pulled the rope Andskoti. The ball

755/1044

of silk glowed silver like a miniature moon. ‘I
hope this was worth it.’
‘Hey,’ I told him, ‘what you did in that contest? I’ve never seen anybody work that
hard. You poured your heart and soul into
that Expando-Duck. And the bulletproof tie?
The chain-mail waistcoat? Just wait. We’ll
get you an endorsement deal with Thor, and
you’ll start a fashion trend.’
‘Magnus is right,’ Sam said. ‘Well, maybe
not about the endorsement deal with Thor –
but you have real talent, Blitzen. If Freya and
the other dwarves don’t see it, that’s their
problem. Without you, we never would’ve
got this far.’
‘You mean you wouldn’t have been kicked
out of the Valkyries; Magnus wouldn’t have
died; we wouldn’t have half the gods mad at
us; fire giants and einherjar wouldn’t be out
to kill us; and we wouldn’t be sitting in the

756/1044

wilderness of Jotunheim with a snoring
god?’
‘Exactly,’ Sam said. ‘Life is good.’
Blitzen snorted, but I was happy to see a
little spark of humour in his eyes. ‘Yeah,
okay. I’m going to sleep. I’ll need it if we’re
going to storm a giant’s castle in the
morning.’
He crawled into the tent and muttered to
Hearthstone, ‘Make some room, you tent
hog!’ Then he draped his overcoat across the
elf, which I thought was kind of sweet.
Sam sat cross-legged in her jeans and new
snow jacket, her hood pulled over her headscarf. Snow had started to fall – big fluffy
flakes that dissolved and hissed in the
flames.
‘Speaking of the contest in Dwarfland,’ I
said, ‘we never got to talk about the horsefly
–’

757/1044

‘Hush.’ Sam glanced apprehensively at
Thor. ‘Certain people aren’t keen on my father, or my father’s children.’
‘Certain people are snoring like a
chainsaw.’
‘Still …’ She studied her hand as if making
sure it hadn’t changed. ‘I promised myself I
wouldn’t shape-shift, and in the last week
I’ve done it twice. The first time … well, the
stag was after us on the World Tree. I turned
into a deer to distract it so Hearthstone
could get away. I didn’t think I had a choice.’
I nodded. ‘And the second time you turned
into the horsefly to help Blitzen. Those are
both great reasons. Besides, shape-shifting is
an awesome power. Why wouldn’t you want
to use it?’
The firelight made her irises almost as red
as Surt’s. ‘Magnus, true shape-shifting isn’t
like my hijab’s camouflage. Shape-shifting
doesn’t just change your appearance. It

758/1044

changes you. Every time I do it, I feel … I feel
more of my father’s nature trying to take
hold of me. He’s fluid, unpredictable, untrustworthy – I don’t want to be like that.’
I gestured at Thor. ‘You could have him for
a dad – a farting giant with goat grease in his
beard and tattoos on his knuckles. Then
everybody in Valhalla would love you.’
I could tell she was trying not to smile.
‘You are very bad. Thor is an important god.’
‘No doubt. So is Frey, supposedly, but I’ve
never met him. At least your dad is kind of
charming, and he has a sense of humour. He
may be a sociopath, but –’
‘Wait.’ Sam’s voice tightened. ‘You talk as
if you’ve met him.’
‘I … I kind of walked right into that, didn’t
I? Truth is, he’s been in a few of my neardeath experiences.’
I told Sam about the dreams: Loki’s warnings, his promises, his suggestion that I take

759/1044

the sword to my Uncle Randolph and forget
about the quest.
Sam listened. I couldn’t tell if she was
angry or shocked or both.
‘So,’ she said, ‘you didn’t tell me this earlier because you didn’t trust me?’
‘Maybe at first. Later, I just – I wasn’t sure
what to do. Your dad is kind of unsettling.’
She tossed a twig into the flames and
watched it burn. ‘You can’t do what my dad
suggests, no matter what he promises. We
have to face Surt. We’ll need the sword.’
I remembered my dream of the burning
throne – the dark face floating in the smoke,
the voice with the heat of a flamethrower.
YOU AND YOUR FRIENDS WILL BE MY
TINDER. YOU WILL START THE FIRE
THAT BURNS THE NINE WORLDS.
I looked around for Jack, but I didn’t see
him. The sword had volunteered to hover the
perimeter ‘on patrol’, as he put it. He

760/1044

suggested I wait until the last possible
minute to reclaim him, since once I did I
would pass out instantly from the strain of
murdering a giantess by nostrilcide.
Snow continued to fall, steaming against
the stones around the fire pit. I thought
about our near-lunch in the food court of the
Transportation Building, how nervous Sam
had acted around Amir. That seemed like a
thousand years ago.
‘When we were on Harald’s boat,’ I recalled, ‘you said your family had a long history with all the Norse god stuff. How? You
said your grandparents came from Iraq …?’
She threw another stick into the flames.
‘Vikings were traders, Magnus. They travelled everywhere. They got all the way to
America. It shouldn’t be a surprise they got
to the Middle East, too. Arabic coins have
been found in Norway. The best Viking
swords were modelled after Damascus steel.’

761/1044

‘But your family … You’ve got a more personal connection?’
She nodded. ‘Back in medieval times,
some of the Vikings settled in Russia. They
called themselves the Rus. That’s where the
word Russian comes from. Anyway, the Caliph – the big king down in Baghdad – he
sent an ambassador north to find out more
about the Vikings, set up trade routes with
them, that kind of stuff. The ambassador’s
name was Ahmed ibn-Fadlan ibn-al-Abbas.’
‘Fadlan like Fadlan’s Falafel. Al-Abbas like
–’
‘Right. Like me. Al-Abbas means of the lion. That’s my branch of the clan. Anyway –’
she pulled a sleeping bag out of her backpack
– ‘this guy Ibn Fadlan kept a journal about
his time with the Vikings. It’s one of the only
written sources about what the Norse were
like back then. Ever since, my family and the
Vikings have been intertwined. Over the

762/1044

centuries, my relatives have racked up a lot
of weird encounters with … supernatural beings. Maybe that’s why my mother wasn’t too
surprised when she found out who my dad
really was.’ She spread out her sleeping bag
next to the fire. ‘And that’s why Samirah alAbbas is fated never to have a normal life.
The end.’
‘Normal life,’ I mused. ‘I don’t even know
what that means any more.’
She looked like she wanted to say
something, then changed her mind. ‘I’m going to sleep.’
I had a weird vision of our ancestors, medieval Chase and medieval al-Abbas, sitting
around a campfire in Russia twelve hundred
years ago, comparing notes on how the
Norse gods had messed up their lives, maybe
with Thor snoring on a bed of furs nearby.
Sam’s family might be intertwined with the

763/1044

gods, but as my Valkyrie she was also intertwined with my family now.
‘We’ll figure things out,’ I promised. ‘I
don’t know about normal, but I’ll do
everything I can to help you get what you
want – a place in the Valkyries again, your
marriage with Amir, a pilot’s licence.
Whatever it takes.’
She stared at me as if processing the words
from another language.
‘What?’ I asked. ‘Do I have goat blood on
my face?’
‘No. Well, yes, you do have goat blood on
your face. But that’s not … I was just trying
to remember the last time anybody said
something that nice to me.’
‘If you want, I’ll go back to insulting you
tomorrow,’ I said. ‘For now, get some sleep.
Sweet dreams.’
Sam curled up by the fire. Snow settled
lightly on the sleeve of her coat. ‘Thank you,

764/1044

Magnus. But no dreams, please. I don’t want
to dream in Jotunheim.’

FIFTY-TWO

I Got the Horse Right
Here. His Name Is
Stanley

Thor was still snoring like a defective wood
chipper when we were ready to leave the
next morning. That’s really saying
something, since I had slept forever. Jack the
sword had not been kidding about the effect
of killing the giantess. As soon as I’d reclaimed the sword after Sam fell asleep, I
had passed out instantly.
At least I hadn’t lost a full twenty-four
hours this time. With Fenris Wolf appearing

767/1044

in only two more days, I couldn’t afford any
more long naps. I wondered if maybe, just
maybe, I was growing more resilient as I became bonded to the sword. I hoped so, but I
still felt like I’d been flattened under a giant
rolling pin all night.
We packed up our gear and ate a cold
breakfast of MORNING, MAGGOT! energy bars
from Blitz’s supply bags (yum). Then
Hearthstone nestled the severed heads of the
two still-dead goats in Thor’s arms like teddy
bears. Never let it be said that elves don’t
have a sense of humour.
I looked down at the drool turning to ice in
Thor’s beard. ‘And to think that the defence
of Nine Worlds rests on this god.’
‘Let’s get going,’ Blitzen muttered. ‘I don’t
want to be around when he wakes up with
Otis and Marvin.’
The dead giantess proved helpful. We
climbed over her to cross the icy swamp.

768/1044

Then we discovered that we could scale her
left foot to reach the first ledge in the side of
the cliff.
Once we got that far, I stared up at the remaining five hundred metres of sheer icy
rock. ‘Awesome. Now the real fun begins.’
‘Wish I could still fly,’ Sam murmured.
I imagined she could fly, with a little
shape-shifting, but after our conversation
last night I decided against mentioning that.
Blitz handed his pack to Hearthstone, then
wriggled his stubby fingers. ‘Don’t worry,
kids. You’re climbing with a dwarf today.’
I frowned. ‘You’re a mountaineer now as
well as a master of fashion?’
‘I told you, kid, dwarves were formed from
maggots that burrowed through Ymir’s
flesh.’
‘And you seem strangely proud of it.’
‘Rock to us is like … well, not rock.’ He
punched the side of the cliff. Rather than

769/1044

breaking his fist, he left an indentation just
the right size for a handhold. ‘I’m not saying
it’ll be fast or easy. It takes me a lot of effort
to shape rock. But we can do it.’
I glanced at Sam. ‘Did you know dwarves
could punch through stone?’
‘Nope. That’s new to me.’
Hearthstone signed, Use the magic rope?
Rather not fall to death.
I shuddered. I couldn’t think about the
rope Andskoti without thinking about the
Wolf, and I didn’t like thinking about the
Wolf. ‘We need that rope to bind Fenris,
right? I don’t want to do anything that might
weaken it.’
‘Don’t worry, kid.’ Blitz brought out the
silken cord. ‘This rope can’t be weakened.
And Hearthstone’s right. We might as well
tie it to one another for safety.’
‘That way if we fall,’ Sam said, ‘we’ll fall
together.’

770/1044

‘Sold,’ I said, trying to tamp down my
anxiety. ‘I love dying with friends.’
We got hitched (so to speak) and followed
our intrepid rock-shaping, fashion-conscious
guide up the side of Mount You-Gotta-BeKidding-Me.
I’d heard homeless military veterans describe war as ninety-five per cent boredom
and five per cent terror. Climbing the cliff
was more like five per cent terror and ninetyfive per cent excruciating pain. My arms
shook. My legs wobbled. Every time I looked
down I wanted to cry or throw up.
Despite the handholds and footholds Blitzen made, the wind almost knocked me off
several times. There was nothing I could do
except keep going.
I knew for certain that my Valhalla-enhanced strength was the only thing keeping
me alive. Magnus 1.0 would have fallen to his
death. I didn’t understand how Hearthstone

771/1044

could manage, bringing up the end of the
rope, but he did. And Sam … demigod or not,
she didn’t have the advantage of being an
einherji. Yet she didn’t complain, didn’t
waver, didn’t slip – which was good, since
she was climbing right above me.
Finally, as the sky began to darken, we
reached the top. Down in the canyon we’d
come from, the body of the giantess was so
small it looked like a normal-size body. The
river glittered in the gloom. If Thor’s camp
was still there, I saw no sign of it.
In the other direction, Jotunheim spread
out like an electron-microscope landscape –
impossibly jagged peaks, crystalline cliffs,
ravines filled with ovoid clouds like floating
bacteria.
The good news: I could see the giant’s fortress. Across a mile-wide chasm, windows
glowed red in the side of a mountain. Towers
rose from the summit as if they’d been

772/1044

shaped from the rock dwarven-style rather
than built.
The bad news: did I mention the mile-wide
chasm? The clifftop where we were standing
was no more than a narrow plateau. The
drop on the other side was just as precipitous
as the one we’d climbed.
Considering it had taken us all day to get
this far, I figured we’d reach the castle in another six months, easy. Unfortunately, it was
Monday evening and the Wolf’s island was
supposed to rise on Wednesday.
‘Let’s camp here tonight,’ Blitzen said.
‘Maybe in the morning we’ll see a better way
across.’
Despite our time crunch, nobody argued.
We were all so tired we collapsed.
As is so often the case, in the fresh light of
morning our situation looked much worse.

773/1044

There were no stairs, no convenient zip
lines, no direct commuter flights to Geirrod’s
fortress. I was about to risk an axe in the face
by suggesting that Sam shape-shift – maybe
change into a giant sugar glider and carry us
across – when Hearthstone signed, Have an
idea.
He pulled out a runestone:

‘M,’ I said.
He shook his head then spelled out the
name: E-H-W-A-Z.
‘Right,’ I said. ‘Because calling it M would
be too easy.’
Sam plucked the stone from Hearth’s
palm. ‘I know this one. It symbolizes a horse,
right? The shape is like a saddle.’
I squinted at the rune. The wind was so
cold and harsh that I had a hard time

774/1044

thinking imaginatively, but the symbol still
looked like an M to me. ‘How does this help
us?’
Hearthstone signed, Means horse, transportation. Maybe a way to go – he pointed
to the castle.
Blitzen tugged his beard. ‘Sounds like
powerful magic. Have you tried it before?’
Hearthstone shook his head. Don’t worry.
I can do it.
‘I know you can,’ said Blitz. ‘But you’ve
already taxed yourself to the limit several
times.’
Be fine, Hearth insisted.
‘I don’t see that we have much choice,’ I
said, ‘since we don’t have anyone who can
grow wings.’
‘I will push you off this mountain,’ Sam
warned.
‘All right,’ Blitzen decided, ‘let’s try it. I
mean the rune, not pushing Magnus off the

775/1044

mountain. Maybe Hearth can summon a
helicopter.’
‘Geirrod would hear a helicopter,’ I said.
‘And probably throw rocks at us. And kill us.’
‘Well, then,’ Blitzen said, ‘perhaps a stealth
helicopter. Hearthstone, do your stuff!’
Sam returned the stone. Hearth passed his
hand over it, moving his lips as if imagining
how the syllables might sound.
The runestone burst into dust. Hearthstone stared at the white powder trickling
through his fingers.
‘I’m guessing it wasn’t supposed to do
that?’ I asked.
‘Guys.’ Sam’s voice was so small it was almost lost in the wind.
She pointed up, where a grey shape was
hurtling out of the clouds. It moved so fast
and blended with the sky so well that I didn’t
realize what the creature was until it was almost on top of us – a stallion twice the size

776/1044

of a normal horse, his coat rippling like liquid steel, his white mane billowing, his eyes
glittering black.
The stallion had no wings, but he galloped
through the air as easily as if he were running down a gentle slope. Only when he
landed next to us did I notice he had four,
five, six … eight legs – a pair in each place
where a normal horse would have one, kind
of like dual wheels on a pickup truck.
I turned to Hearthstone. ‘Dude, when you
summon a horse, you don’t mess around.’
Hearthstone grinned. Then his eyes rolled
up in his head and he fell forward. I managed to catch him and ease him to the
ground while Blitzen and Sam moved warily
around the stallion.
‘It – it c-can’t be,’ Blitzen stammered.
‘One of Sleipnir’s offspring?’ Sam
wondered. ‘Gods, what a magnificent
animal.’

777/1044

The horse nuzzled her hand, clearly
pleased with the compliment.
I moved towards him, fascinated by his intelligent eyes and his regal stance. The stallion gave the word horsepower a new meaning. He radiated strength.
‘Is somebody going to introduce me?’ I
asked.
Sam shook herself out of her reverie. ‘I … I
don’t know who he is. He looks like Sleipnir,
Odin’s steed, but this can’t be him. Only Odin can summon him. I’m guessing this is one
of Sleipnir’s sons.’
‘Well, he’s amazing.’ I extended my hand.
The horse brushed his lips against my fingers. ‘He’s friendly. And he’s definitely big
enough to carry us all across the chasm.
Would you be okay with that, buddy?’
The horse nickered, like, Uh, duh, that’s
why I’m here.

778/1044

‘The eight legs are –’ I was about to say
weird but changed my mind – ‘awesome.
How did that happen?’
Blitzen glanced at Sam. ‘Sleipnir was one
of Loki’s children. They tend to come out …
interesting.’
I smiled. ‘So this horse is your nephew,
Sam?’
She glared at me. ‘Let’s not go there.’
‘How did your dad father a horse?’
Blitzen coughed. ‘Actually, Loki was
Sleipnir’s mother.’
‘What –?’
‘Let’s definitely not go there,’ Sam warned.
I filed that away for later research. ‘Okay,
Mr Horse, since we don’t know your name,
I’m going to call you Stanley, because you
look like a Stanley. That okay with you?’
The horse seemed to shrug, which was
good enough for me.

779/1044

We draped Hearthstone over Stanley’s
extra-long back like a sack of elfish potatoes.
The rest of us climbed on.
‘We’re going to that castle over there,
Stanley,’ I told the stallion. ‘Looking for a
quiet entrance. That work for you?’
The horse whinnied. I was pretty sure he
was warning me to hold on.
I wondered what exactly I should hold on
to, since there were no reins and no saddle.
Then the stallion pawed the rocks with his
front four hooves, leaped off the side of the
cliff and plummeted straight down.
And we all died.

FIFTY-THREE

How to Kill Giants
Politely

Just kidding this time.
It only felt like we were going to die.
The horse must have enjoyed the feeling of
free fall. I didn’t. I grabbed his neck and
screamed in terror (which was not very
stealthy). Meanwhile, Blitzen grabbed my
waist, and behind him Sam somehow stayed
on board while managing to keep Hearthstone from slipping into oblivion.
The fall felt like hours, though it probably
lasted only a second or two. During that time

782/1044

I thought of several more colourful names
for Stanley. Finally he churned his eight legs
like locomotive wheels. We levelled out and
began to climb.
Stanley punched through a cloud, zigzagged along the face of the mountain and
landed on a window ledge near the top of the
fortress. I dismounted, my legs shaking, then
helped the others with Hearthstone.
The ledge was so wide that the four of us
plus the horse could stand in one corner and
seem no bigger than mice. The window had
no glass (probably because there wasn’t that
much glass in the world), but Stanley had
landed us behind a panel of gathered curtain,
so nobody inside could’ve seen us, even if
they were randomly scanning the window for
mice.
‘Thanks, buddy,’ I told Stanley. ‘That was
horrifying. I mean, great.’

783/1044

Stanley nickered. He gave me an affectionate nip, then disappeared in a burst of dust.
On the windowsill where he’d been standing
was the ehwaz runestone.
‘He seemed to like me,’ I noted.
Blitzen slid down next to Hearthstone and
said, ‘Eep.’
Only Sam didn’t seem ruffled. In fact, she
seemed exhilarated. Her eyes sparkled and
she couldn’t stop smiling. I guess she really
did love flying, even if it was a near-death
free fall on an eight-legged horse.
‘Of course Stanley liked you.’ She picked
up the runestone. ‘Horses are one of Frey’s
sacred animals.’
‘Huh.’ I thought about my experiences
with the Boston mounted police that
patrolled the Public Garden. The horses always seemed friendly, even if their riders
weren’t. One time, when a mounted officer
had started to question me, his horse had

784/1044

suddenly taken off, galloping towards the
nearest low-hanging tree branch.
‘I’ve always liked horses,’ I said.
‘Frey’s temples kept their own herds,’ Sam
told me. ‘No mortal was allowed to ride them
without the god’s permission.’
‘Well, I wish Stanley had asked my permission before leaving,’ I said. ‘We have no exit
strategy, and Hearthstone doesn’t look like
he’s going to be casting more spells anytime
soon.’
The elf had regained consciousness … sort
of. He leaned against Blitz, giggling silently
and making random signs like, Butterfly.
Pop. Yippee. Blitzen clutched his stomach
and stared into space as if he were thinking
of interesting ways to die.
Sam and I crept to the edge of the curtain.
We peeked around it and found we were at
ceiling level of a stadium-size room. In the
hearth burned a fire as big as an urban riot.

785/1044

The only exit was a closed wooden door on
the far wall. In the centre of the room, seated
at a stone table, two giantesses were having
dinner, ripping into a carcass that reminded
me of the roast beast in Valhalla’s dining
hall.
The giantesses didn’t look as tall as the
dead one back in the river, though it was
hard to be sure. In Jotunheim, proportions
made no sense. My eyes felt like they were
constantly adjusting to different funhouse
mirrors.
Sam nudged my arm. ‘Look.’
She pointed to a birdcage suspended from
the ceiling, hanging just about eye-level to
us. Inside the cage, waddling around on a
bed of straw and looking miserable, was a
white swan.
‘That’s a Valkyrie,’ Sam said.
‘How can you be sure?’

786/1044

‘I just am. Not only that … I’m pretty sure
it’s Gunilla.’
I shuddered. ‘What would she be doing
here?’
‘Looking for us. Valkyries are excellent
trackers. I imagine she got here before we
did and …’ Sam mimed a hand snatching
something out of the air.
‘So … do we leave her?’
‘For the giants to eat? Of course not.’
‘She set you up. She got you kicked out of
the Valkyries.’
‘She’s still my captain,’ Sam said. ‘She …
well, she has her reasons for mistrusting me.
A few centuries ago, there was a son of Loki
who made it into Valhalla.’
‘He and Gunilla fell in love,’ I guessed. ‘I
kind of got that impression when she was
taking me on a tour of the hotel.’
Sam nodded. ‘The son of Loki betrayed
her. Turned out he was a spy for my dad.

787/1044

Broke her heart. Well … you get the picture.
Anyway, I’m not going to leave her to die.’
I sighed. ‘Okay.’
I pulled off my pendant.
Jack the sword hummed to life.
‘About time,’ he said. ‘What did I miss
yesterday?’
‘Bunch of climbing,’ I told him. ‘Now we’re
looking at two more giantesses. How do you
feel about flying up their nostrils?’
The sword tugged at my hand, his blade
peeking around the corner of the curtain.
‘Dude, we’re on their windowsill. We’ve technically crossed the threshold of the giants’
home.’
‘So?’
‘So you have to follow the rules! Killing
them in their home without provocation
would be rude!’
‘Right,’ I said. ‘We wouldn’t want to kill
them rudely.’

788/1044

‘Hey, señor, guest rights and host rights
are important magic protocols. They keep
situations from escalating.’
Blitzen groaned in the corner. ‘The sword
has a point, kid. And, no, that wasn’t a joke.
We should go in, claim guest rights and
barter for what we need. If the giants try to
kill us, then we can attack.’
Hearthstone hiccupped, grinned and
signed, Washing machine.
Sam shook her head. ‘You two are in no
condition to go anywhere. Blitz, stay here
and watch Hearthstone. Magnus and I will
go in, find Thor’s hammer and free Gunilla.
If things go wrong, it’ll be up to you two to
figure out how to rescue us.’
‘But –’ Blitzen put his fist over his mouth
and stifled an urp. ‘Yeah … okay. How are
you guys going to get down there?’
Sam peered over the ledge. ‘We’ll use your
magic rope to reach the floor. Then we’ll

789/1044

walk up to the giants and introduce
ourselves.’
‘I hate this plan,’ I said. ‘Let’s do it.’

FIFTY-FOUR

Why You Should Not Use
a Steak Knife as a Diving
Board

Rappelling down the wall was the easy part.
When we reached the bottom, I started
having serious doubts. The giantesses were
definitely smaller than their dead sister –
maybe fifty feet tall. If I’d been asked to
wrestle one of their big toes, I could’ve won
no problem. Other than that, I didn’t like my
chances.
‘I feel like Jack up the beanstalk,’ I
muttered.

792/1044

Sam laughed under her breath. ‘Where do
you think that story comes from? It’s a cultural memory – a watered-down account of
what happens when humans blunder into
Jotunheim.’
‘Super.’
The sword buzzed in my hand. ‘Besides,
you can’t be Jack. I’m Jack.’
I couldn’t argue with that logic.
We navigated across the stone floor,
through a wasteland of dust balls, food
scraps and grease puddles.
The fireplace was so hot my clothes
steamed. My hair crackled. The smell of the
giants’ body odour – a combination of wet
clay and sour meat – was almost as deadly as
a sword flying up my nose.
We got within shouting distance of the
dining table, but the two giantesses still
hadn’t noticed us. They both wore sandals,
size-120 leather dresses and Flintstones-style

793/1044

necklaces made from polished boulders.
Their stringy black hair was woven into pigtails. Their grey faces were hideously painted
with rouge and lipstick. I didn’t have my
fashion advisor Blitzen with me, but I
guessed the giant sisters were dolled up for a
girls’ night out, even though it was barely
lunchtime.
‘Ready?’ Sam asked me.
The answer was no, but I took a deep
breath and yelled, ‘Hello!’
The giantesses kept chatting, banging their
cups and chomping their meat.
I tried again. ‘YO!’
The big ladies froze. They scanned the
room. Finally the one on the left spotted us.
She burst out laughing, spraying bits of
mead and meat. ‘More humans! I don’t believe it!’
The other giantess leaned over. ‘Is that another Valkyrie? And …’ She sniffed the air.

794/1044

‘The boy is an einherji. Perfect! I was just
wondering what we’d have for dessert.’
‘We claim guest rights!’ I yelled.
The giantess on the left made a sour face.
‘Now, why did you have to go and do that?’
‘We want to barter.’ I pointed to the birdcage, now so far above us I could only see its
rusted base hovering like a moon. ‘For that
swan’s freedom. And also … possibly, you
know, if you have any stolen weapons lying
around. Like, I don’t know, a hammer or
something.’
‘Smooth,’ Sam muttered.
The giantesses looked at each other like
they were trying not to giggle. They’d obviously been hitting the mead pretty hard.
‘Very well,’ said the giantess on the left. ‘I
am Gjalp. This is my sister Greip. We agree
to host you while we barter. What are your
names?’

795/1044

‘I am Magnus, son of Natalie,’ I said. ‘And
this is –’
‘Samirah, daughter of Ayesha,’ said Sam.
‘You are welcome in the house of our father, Geirrod,’ said Gjalp. ‘But I can barely hear
you down there. Do you mind if I put you in
a chair?’
‘Uh, okay,’ I said.
The other sister, Griep, snatched us up like
toys. She set us on an empty chair, its seat
the size of a living room. The tabletop was
still a good five feet above my head.
‘Oh, dear,’ Griep said. ‘That’s still too low.
May I raise your chair for you?’
Sam started to say, ‘Magnus –’
I blurted out, ‘Sure.’
With a shriek of glee, Griep picked up our
chair and thrust it over her head. If not for
the backrest, Sam and I would’ve been
smashed flat against the ceiling. As it was, we

796/1044

got knocked off our feet and showered in
plaster.
Griep put down the chair. It took a moment for my eyeballs to stop rattling. Then I
saw the giantesses’ scowling faces looming
over us.
‘It didn’t work,’ Griep said, with obvious
disappointment.
‘Of course it didn’t work,’ Gjalp growled.
‘You never do that trick right. I told you, it
has to be something without a back, like a
stool. And we should have installed those
spikes in the ceiling.’
‘You were trying to kill us!’ I said. ‘That
can’t be in the rules for good hosts.’
‘Kill you?’ Gjalp looked offended. ‘That’s
an absolutely baseless accusation. My sister
only did as you requested. She asked your
permission to raise the chair.’
‘You just said it was a trick.’

797/1044

‘Did I?’ Gjalp blinked. Up close, her heavily mascaraed lashes looked like the obstacle
course for a mud run. ‘Pretty sure I didn’t.’
I looked at the Sword of Summer, which
was still in my hand. ‘Jack, have they broken
the host rules yet? Because trying to kill us
seems kinda borderline.’
‘Not unless they admit their intent,’ Jack
said. ‘And they’re saying it was an accident.’
The giantesses both straightened.
‘A talking sword?’ Gjalp said. ‘Well now,
that’s interesting.’
‘You sure I can’t raise your chair for you
again?’ Griep offered. ‘I could run to the kitchen and get a stool. It’s no trouble.’
‘Honoured hosts,’ Sam said, her voice
shaky, ‘please put us gently and safely on the
top of your table, so we may barter with you.’
Griep muttered unhappily, but she did as
Sam asked. The giantess deposited us next to
her fork and knife, which were roughly the

798/1044

same size as me. Her mug would’ve made a
fine water tower for a rural town. I just
hoped it wasn’t named Boom Daddy.
‘So …’ Griep plopped back in her chair.
‘You want freedom for the swan? You’ll have
to wait until our father gets home to negotiate terms. She is his prisoner, not ours.’
‘She’s a Valkyrie, of course,’ Gjalp added.
‘Flew in our window last night. She refuses to
show her true form. Thinks she can fool us
by staying in that silly swan costume, but
Dad is too clever for her.’
‘Bummer,’ I said. ‘Well, we tried.’
‘Magnus …’ Sam chided. ‘Gracious hosts,
will you at least consent not to kill the swan
until we’ve had a chance to speak with
Geirrod?’
Gjalp shrugged. ‘Like I said, her fate is up
to Dad. He might let her go if you surrendered yourselves in exchange, but I don’t

799/1044

know. We need something spicy for the stew
tonight.’
‘Let’s put a pin in that,’ I said.
‘Which is only an expression,’ Sam added
hastily. ‘By no means is my friend granting
you permission to put a pin in anything, especially us.’
‘Nice save,’ I told her.
Sam gave me a you’re-such-an-idiot look.
I was getting used to that.
Gjalp crossed her arms, forming a new
mesa against her chest. ‘You said you also
wanted to barter for a stolen weapon?’
‘Yeah,’ I said. ‘Something thunder-goddish, if you have it – not that any particular
thunder god is missing any particular
weapon.’
Griep cackled. ‘Oh, we have something like
that … something that belongs to Thor
himself.’

800/1044

Since Thor wasn’t there to creatively cuss,
Sam did the honours, muttering a few comments that I doubted her grandparents
would’ve approved of.
‘Those are just expressions,’ I added hastily. ‘In no way was my friend giving you permission to do … any of those rude and colourful things. Will you barter with us for the
h– for the weapon you spoke of?’
‘Of course!’ Gjalp grinned. ‘In fact, I’d like
to wrap up these negotiations quickly since
my sister and I have an appointment –’
‘With hot frost-giant twins,’ Griep said.
‘– so we’ll make you a fair deal,’ Gjalp continued. ‘We’ll give you Thor’s weapon for
that lovely talking sword. And we’ll release
the swan – I’m pretty sure Dad will be okay
with that – as long as you give yourselves in
exchange. You won’t get a better deal than
that.’
‘That’s hardly a deal,’ Sam growled.

801/1044

‘Then you can refuse,’ Griep said, ‘and
leave in peace. It’s all the same to us.’
Jack thrummed indignantly, his runes
glowing. ‘Magnus, you’d never give me up,
right? We’re friends! You’re not like your dad
– not gonna toss me aside as soon as you see
something you like better?’
I thought about Loki’s suggestion that I
give the sword to my Uncle Randolph. At the
time, I’d actually been tempted. Now, the
idea seemed impossible – and only partly because the giantesses wanted to put us in a
cage and have us for dinner. Jack had saved
our lives at least twice now. I liked him, even
if he did occasionally call me señor.
An alternative came to me. A bad idea, yes,
but better than the giants’ offer.
‘Jack,’ I said, ‘hypothetically speaking, if I
told these giantesses how we killed their sister, would that break the rules of guest
etiquette?’

802/1044

‘What?’ Gjalp cried.
Jack’s runes glowed a more cheerful shade
of red. ‘No etiquette problem there, my
friend, because that happened before we
were guests here.’
‘Okay.’ I smiled at the giantesses. ‘We
killed your sister – big ugly lady, trying to
block the river and drown Thor? Yeah. She’s
dead now.’
‘LIES!’ Gjalp shot to her feet. ‘Puny humans! You could not possibly have killed our
sister!’
‘Actually, my sword flew up her nose and
scrambled her brains.’
Griep howled in outrage. ‘I should have
crushed you like bugs! Curse my lack of a
stool and strategically placed ceiling spikes!’
I’ll admit, having two giantesses tower
over me bellowing death threats was a wee
bit unnerving.
But Sam kept her cool.

803/1044

She pointed her axe accusingly at Griep.
‘So, you were trying to kill us just now!’
‘Of course, you dolt!’
‘Which violates the rules of hosts.’
‘Who cares?’ Griep cried.
‘Magnus’s sword does,’ Sam said. ‘Jack,
did you hear that?’
‘I sure did. I’d like to point out, though,
that the effort required to kill these two giantesses might be too much –’
‘Do it!’ I hurled the sword.
Jack spiralled upward, straight into
Griep’s right nostril and out of her left. The
giantess collapsed, shaking the room at 6.8
on the Richter scale.
Gjalp stifled a scream. She covered her
nose and mouth and stumbled around as
Jack tried in vain to stab his way through her
fingers.
‘Oh, this one is getting smart!’ Jack yelled.
‘A little help over here?’

804/1044

‘Magnus!’ Sam pushed the giantess’s steak
knife to the edge of the table until the blade
extended like a diving board.
I got what she wanted me to do. It was stupid crazy, but I didn’t give myself time to reflect. I ran full tilt at the knife and jumped
towards the end of the blade.
Sam yelled, ‘Wait!’
By then I was already in mid-air. I landed
on the knife, which catapulted upward as I
dropped. The plan worked, sort of. I landed
on the empty seat of the chair, which was not
far enough down to kill me, but was enough
to break my leg. Hooray! The pain drove a
hot nail up the base of my spine.
Gjalp got it worse. The spinning steak
knife hit her in the chest. It didn’t impale
her. It didn’t even go through her dress, but
the poke was enough to make her yell. She
lowered her hands, grabbing instinctively for

805/1044

her chest, which allowed Jack full access to
her nose.
A second later, Gjalp was lying dead on the
floor next to her sister.
‘Magnus!’ Sam lowered herself off the
table and dropped next to me on the chair.
‘You fool! I wanted you to help me throw a
salt shaker on the blade! I didn’t expect you
to jump on it yourself!’
‘You’re welcome.’ I grimaced. ‘Also, ow.’
‘Is it broken?’
‘Yeah. Don’t worry, I’m a fast healer. Give
me an hour –’
‘I don’t think we have –’ Sam started to
say.
From the next room, a deep voice boomed,
‘Girls, I’m home!’

FIFTY-FIVE

I’m Carried into Battle by
the First Dwarven
Airborne Division

There’s never a great time for Daddy Giant to
come home.
But when you’re sitting in his dining room
with your leg broken, the corpses of two of
his daughters sprawled nearby … that’s an
especially bad time. Sam and I stared at each
other as the giant’s footsteps echoed louder
and louder in the next chamber.
Sam’s expression said: I got nothing.
I, also, had nothing.

808/1044

Which is exactly the sort of moment when
you might welcome a dwarf, an elf and a
swan parachuting onto your chair. Blitzen
and Hearth were lashed side-by-side in the
harness, with Gunilla the waterfowl cradled
in Hearthstone’s arms. Blitzen pulled the
steering toggles and executed a perfect landing. Behind him pooled the parachute – a
swathe of turquoise silk that exactly matched
Blitz’s suit. That was the only fact about his
entrance that did not surprise me.
‘How?’ I asked.
Blitzen scoffed. ‘Why do you look so
amazed? You distracted those giantesses
long enough. I’d be a poor dwarf indeed if I
couldn’t rig a grappling hook, shoot a line
from the window to the birdcage, shimmy
across, free the swan and use my emergency
parachute to get down here.’
Sam pinched her nose. ‘You’ve had an
emergency parachute this entire time?’

809/1044

‘Don’t be silly,’ Blitzen said. ‘Dwarves always carry emergency parachutes. Don’t
you?’
‘We’ll talk about this later,’ I said. ‘Right
now –’
‘Girls?’ called the giant from the next
room. His speech sounded a little slurred.
‘Wh-where are you?’
I snapped my fingers. ‘Come on, guys, options. Sam, can you and Gunilla camouflage
us?’
‘My hijab can only cover two people,’ Sam
said. ‘And Gunilla … the fact that she’s still a
swan might indicate she’s too weak to change
back to normal.’
The swan honked.
‘I’ll take that as a yes,’ Sam said. ‘It could
be a few hours.’
‘Which we don’t have.’ I looked at Hearth.
‘Runestones?’

810/1044

No strength, he signed, though he hardly
needed to tell me that. He was upright and
conscious but still looked like he’d been run
over by an eight-legged horse.
‘Jack!’ I called to the sword. ‘Where is
Jack?’
From the table above us, the sword yelled,
‘Dude, what? I’m washing off in this goblet.
Give a guy some privacy, huh?’
‘Magnus,’ Sam said, ‘you can’t ask him to
kill three giants in a row. That much effort
really will kill you.’
In the next room, the footsteps got louder.
The giant sounded like he was stumbling.
‘Gjalp? Griep? I swear – HIC! – if you’re texting those frost-giant boys again, I will wring
your necks!’
‘The floor,’ I decided. ‘Get me to the floor!’
Blitzen scooped me up, which almost
made me black out from pain. He yelled,
‘Hang on!’ and leaped from the chair,

811/1044

somehow managing to paraglide me down
safely. By the time I regained my senses,
Sam, Hearth and his new pet swan were
standing next to us, apparently having used
the chair leg as a fire pole.
I shivered with nausea. My face was slick
with sweat, and my broken leg felt like one
enormous open blister, but we had no time
for minor concerns like my unbearable pain.
Across the threshold of the dining-room
door, the shadows of the giant’s feet got
closer and darker, though they did seem to
be weaving back and forth.
‘Blitzen, carry me under that door!’ I said.
‘We have to intercept Geirrod.’
‘Excuse me?’ asked the dwarf.
‘You’re strong! You’re already holding me.
Hurry!’
Grumbling, he jogged towards the door,
every bounce sending a stab of pain into the
base of my skull. The parachute slithered

812/1044

behind us. Sam and Hearth followed, the
swan honking unhappily in Hearthstone’s
arms.
The doorknob started to turn. We ducked
under the sill and charged out the other side,
right between the giant’s feet.
I yelled, ‘HI! HOW YA DOING?’
Geirrod stumbled back. I guess he hadn’t
been expecting to see a paratrooper dwarf
carrying a human, followed by another human and an elf holding a swan.
I wasn’t prepared for what I saw either.
For one thing, the room we entered was
about half the size of the one we’d just left.
By most standards, the hall would’ve been
considered grand. The black-marble floor
gleamed. Rows of stone columns were interspersed with iron braziers filled with burning
coals like dozens of barbecue grills. But the
ceilings were only about twenty-five-feet tall.
Even the door we’d come through was

813/1044

smaller on this side, though that made no
sense.
Squeezing back under the sill would be impossible. In fact, I didn’t see how Gjalp or
Griep could have fitted through the doorway,
unless they changed size as they moved from
room to room.
Maybe that’s what they did. Giants were
shape-shifters. Magic and illusion were
second nature to them. If I spent much more
time here, I’d have to bring a large supply of
motion-sickness medicine and some 3-D
glasses.
In front of us, Geirrod was still staggering
around, sloshing mead from his drinking
horn.
‘Whoeryou?’ he slurred.
‘Guests!’ I called. ‘We have claimed guest
rights!’
I doubted those applied any more, since
we’d killed our hosts, but since my etiquette-

814/1044

minded sword was still in the next room,
washing the nostril goo off his blade, nobody
challenged me.
Geirrod frowned. He looked like he’d just
come from a wild party at the Jotunheim
Marquee, which was weird, since the day was
young. Giants apparently partied 24/7.
He wore a rumpled mauve jacket, an untucked black shirt, striped slacks and shiny
shoes that many patent leather animals had
died to create. His dark hair was greased
back but springing up in unruly cowlicks. His
face had a three-day stubble. He reeked of
fermented honey. The overall impression
was less ‘fashionable nightclub dude’ and
more ‘well-dressed wino’.
The weirdest thing about him was his size.
I’m not going to say he was short. Twenty
feet tall is still good if you’re looking for
somebody to play point in the NBA or
change those hard-to-reach lightbulbs. But

815/1044

the guy was minuscule compared to his
daughters, who were, of course, now dead.
Geirrod belched. Judging from his expression, he was making a mighty effort to form
rational thoughts. ‘If you’re guests … why
have you got my swan? And where are my
daughters?’
Sam forced a laugh. ‘Oh, those crazy girls?
We were bartering with them for your swan.’
‘Yeah,’ I said. ‘Right now they’re on the
floor in the other room. They don’t look so
good.’ I mimed drinking from a bottle, which
probably confused Hearthstone, as it looked
like the sign for I love you.
Geirrod seemed to get my meaning. His
shoulders relaxed, as if the idea of his daughters passing out drunk on the floor was nothing to be concerned about.
‘Well, then,’ he said, ‘as long as they weren’t – HIC! – entertaining those frost-giant
boys again.’

816/1044

‘Nope, just us,’ I assured him.
Blitzen grunted as he shifted me in his
arms. ‘Heavy.’
Hearthstone, trying to keep up with the
conversation, signed I love you at the giant.
‘Oh, Great Geirrod!’ Sam said. ‘We actually
came here to bargain for Thor’s weapon.
Your daughters told us you have it.’
Geirrod glanced to his right. Against the
far wall, almost hidden behind a column, was
a human-size iron door.
‘And the weapon is behind that door,’ I
guessed.
Geirrod’s eyes widened. ‘What sorcery is
this? How did you know that?’
‘We want to barter for the weapon,’ I
repeated.
In Hearthstone’s arms, Gunilla honked
irritably.
‘And also for the freedom of this swan,’
Sam added.

817/1044

‘Ha!’ Geirrod sloshed more mead from his
drinking horn. ‘I don’t – HIC! – need anything you could offer. But perhaps you could
– BELCH – earn the weapon and the golden
goose.’
‘The swan,’ I corrected.
‘Whatever,’ said the giant.
Blitzen whimpered, ‘Heavy. Very heavy.’
The pain in my leg made it hard to think.
Every time Blitzen moved I wanted to
scream, but I tried to keep a clear head.
‘What did you have in mind?’ I asked the
giant.
‘Entertain me! Join me in a game!’
‘Like … Words with Friends?’
‘What? No! Like catch!’ He gestured disdainfully towards the dining room. ‘I have
only daughters. They never want to play
catch with me. I like playing catch! Play
catch with me.’

818/1044

I glanced at Sam. ‘I think he wants to play
catch.’
‘Bad idea,’ she murmured.
‘Survive ten minutes!’ Geirrod said. ‘That’s
all I ask! Then I’ll be – HIC! – happy.’
‘Survive?’ I asked. ‘A game of catch?’
‘Good, so you agree!’ He stumbled to the
nearest brazier and scooped up a red-hot
coal the size of an easy chair. ‘Go long!’

FIFTY-SIX

Never Ask a Dwarf to ‘Go
Long’

‘Run!’ I told Blitzen. ‘Run, run, run!’
Blitzen, who was still trailing the parachute, only managed a dazed stumble.
‘Heavy, very heavy,’ he wheezed again.
We made it about twenty feet before Geirrod yelled, ‘CATCH!’
The four of us ducked behind the nearest
column as a coal cannonball slammed
against it, burning a hole straight through
the stone and spraying ash and sparks over

821/1044

our heads. The column groaned. Cracks
spread all the way up to the ceiling.
‘Run more!’ Sam yelped.
We shambled across the hall as Geirrod
scooped coals and threw them with appalling
accuracy. If he hadn’t been drunk, we
would’ve been in serious trouble.
The next salvo set Blitzen’s parachute on
fire. Sam was able to cut it off with her axe,
but we lost valuable time. Another chunk of
flaming apocalypse blasted a crater in the
floor next to us, singeing Gunilla’s wings and
Hearthstone’s scarf. Sparks flew into Blitzen’s eyes.
‘I’m blind!’ he yelped.
‘I’ll direct you!’ I shouted. ‘Left! Left! Your
other left!’
Meanwhile, across the hall, Geirrod was
having a grand old time singing in Jotunese,
staggering from brazier to brazier, occasionally dousing himself in mead. ‘Come on now,

822/1044

little guests! This is not how you play. You’re
supposed to catch the coals and throw them
back!’
I looked around desperately for exits.
There was one other door, on the wall directly across from the dining room, but it was
too small to crawl under and too big to force
open, not to mention barred with a treetrunk beam across iron brackets.
For the first time since becoming an einherji, I was annoyed that my super-quick
healing wasn’t super quick enough. If we
were going to die, I at least wanted to be
standing on my own two feet.
I glanced at the ceiling. Above the last
column Geirrod had hit, cracks spread across
the roof. The column bowed, ready to snap. I
remembered the first time my mom had
made me set up our camping tent by myself.
The poles had been a nightmare. Getting
them to hold the roof required just the right

823/1044

balance of tension. But making them collapse … that was easy.
‘I’ve got an idea,’ I said. ‘Blitzen, you’re going to have to carry me a while longer, unless
Sam –’
‘Um, no,’ said Sam.
‘I’m fine,’ Blitzen whimpered. ‘I’m just
great. I can almost see again.’
‘Okay, everybody,’ I said. ‘We’re going to
run towards the giant.’
I didn’t need sign language to read
Hearth’s expression: Are you crazy? The
swan gave me the same look.
‘Just follow my lead,’ I said. ‘It’ll be fun.’
‘Please,’ Sam begged, ‘don’t let those
words be carved on my tombstone.’
I yelled at the giant, ‘Hey, Geirrod, you
throw like a Folkvanger person!’
‘What? BAH!’ Geirrod turned to scoop up
another coal.
‘Straight at him,’ I told my friends. ‘Go!’

824/1044

As the giant prepared to throw, I told Blitzen, ‘Right, go right!’
We all ducked behind the nearest pillar.
Geirrod’s coal bored straight through it,
spewing cinders and sending more cracks up
the ceiling.
‘Now left,’ I told my friends. ‘Towards him
and up another row.’
‘What are you –’ Sam’s eyes widened with
understanding. ‘Oh, gods, you really are
crazy.’
‘Got a better idea?’
‘Sadly, no.’
We ran across Geirrod’s line of sight.
‘Your daughters aren’t drunk!’ I shouted.
‘They’re dead!’
‘WHAT? NO!’
Another coal cannonball hurtled towards
us, hitting the nearest column with such
force it collapsed into a pile of colossal stone
Polo mints.

825/1044

The ceiling groaned. The cracks spread.
We ran into the central aisle and I yelled,
‘MISSED AGAIN!’
Geirrod howled in fury. He tossed aside
his drinking horn so he could scoop coals
with both hands. Fortunately for us, his anger and his double-handed throwing made
his aim terrible. We jogged around him,
weaving from column to column as he
splattered coal everywhere, tipping over braziers, breaking pillars.
I insulted Geirrod’s suit, his haircut, his
patent-leather shoes. Finally the giant tossed
an entire brazier at us, taking out the last
support pillar on his side of the room.
‘Retreat!’ I told Blitzen. ‘Go! NOW!’
Poor Blitzen huffed and wheezed. We ran
for the far wall as Geirrod shouted,
‘Cowards! I will kill you!’
He easily could have run after us and
caught us, but the giant’s drunken mind was

826/1044

still thinking in terms of projectile weapons.
He searched around him for more coals as
the ceiling above him crumbled.
Too late, he realized what was happening.
He looked up and screamed as half the room
collapsed on top of him, burying Geirrod under a thousand tons of rock.
The next thing I knew, I was on the floor in
a white-out of dust and debris, trying my
best to cough up my lungs.
Slowly the air cleared. A few feet away,
Sam sat cross-legged, also hacking and gasping, looking like she’d been rolled in flour.
‘Blitzen?’ I called. ‘Hearth?’
I was so worried about them I forgot about
my broken leg. I tried to stand and was surprised to find that I could. The leg still
throbbed with agony, but it held my weight.
Blitzen came stumbling out of a dust
cloud. ‘Present,’ he squeaked. His suit was

827/1044

ruined. His hair and beard had gone prematurely grey with plaster.
I tackled him in a hug. ‘You,’ I said, ‘are
the strongest, most amazing dwarf ever.’
‘Okay, kid, okay.’ He patted my arm.
‘Where’s Hearthstone? Hearth!’
In moments like that, we forgot that
yelling Hearthstone’s name wasn’t really
helpful.
‘Here he is,’ Sam called, brushing some
rubble off the fallen elf. ‘I think he’s okay.’
‘Thank Odin!’ Blitz started forward but almost fell.
‘Whoa, there.’ I propped him against one
of the remaining columns. ‘Just rest for a
sec. I’ll be right back.’
I jogged over to Sam and helped her extract Hearthstone from the wreckage.
His hair was smouldering, but otherwise
he looked all right. We pulled him to his feet.

828/1044

Immediately he started scolding me in sign
language: Stupid? Trying to kill us?
It took me a second to realize he wasn’t
holding the swan.
‘Wait,’ I said. ‘Where’s Gunilla?’
Behind me, Blitzen yelped. I turned and
discovered a hostage situation in progress.
‘I’m right here,’ Gunilla snarled. She was
back in human form, standing behind Blitzen, the point of her blazing spear pressed
to his throat. ‘And the four of you are coming
back to Valhalla as my prisoners.’

FIFTY-SEVEN

Sam Hits the EJECT
Button

Gunilla jabbed her spear tip against Blitz’s
jugular.
‘No closer,’ she warned. ‘Rogues and liars,
all of you. You’ve endangered Midgard and
Asgard, roused the giants, caused chaos
across the realms –’
‘We also rescued you from a birdcage,’ I
added.
‘After luring me here in the first place!’
‘Nobody lured you,’ I said. ‘Nobody asked
you to hunt us.’

831/1044

‘Gunilla.’ Samirah placed her axe on the
floor. ‘Let the dwarf go, please.’
‘Urgh,’ Blitzen agreed.
The Valkyrie captain glanced at Hearthstone. ‘You, elf – don’t even think about it.
Put that bag of runestones on the floor or I
will burn you to ashes.’
I hadn’t realized Hearthstone was about to
make a move. He complied with Gunilla’s order, though his eyes blazed. He looked like
he wanted to do something much worse to
Gunilla than put her in a magic hamster
wheel.
Sam raised her palms. ‘We’re not going to
fight you. Please, release the dwarf. We all
know what a Valkyrie spear can do.’
I didn’t, actually, but I tried to look as
meek and harmless as possible. As exhausted
as I felt, it wasn’t hard.
Gunilla eyed me. ‘Where is your sword,
Magnus?’

832/1044

I gestured to the ruined end of the hall.
‘Last I checked, he was taking a bath in a
goblet.’
Gunilla considered that. It was the sort of
statement that only made sense in the loony
world of the Vikings. ‘Very well.’ She shoved
Blitzen towards me.
She swept her spear forward, keeping us
all within striking distance. The weapon’s
light was so intense I felt like it was baking
my skin.
‘We will return to Asgard as soon as my
full strength returns,’ said Gunilla. ‘In the
meantime, explain why you were asking the
giants about Thor’s weapon.’
‘Oh …’ I remembered Thor being pretty
specific about not telling anyone of his missing hammer. ‘Well –’
‘A trick,’ Sam interrupted. ‘To confuse the
giants.’

833/1044

Gunilla narrowed her eyes. ‘A dangerous
trick. If the giants believed Thor had lost his
hammer … the consequences would be
unthinkable.’
‘Speaking of unthinkable,’ I said, ‘Surt is
going to release Fenris Wolf tomorrow
night.’
‘Tonight,’ Sam corrected.
My stomach dropped. ‘Isn’t it Tuesday?
Freya said the full moon was Wednesday –’
‘Which technically starts at sundown on
Tuesday,’ Sam said. ‘The full moon rises
tonight.’
‘Well, that’s just wonderful,’ I said. ‘Why
didn’t you say so?’
‘I thought you understood.’
‘Silence, both of you!’ Gunilla ordered.
‘Magnus Chase, you’ve fallen for the lies of
this daughter of Loki.’
‘You mean the full moon isn’t tonight?’

834/1044

‘No, it’s tonight. I meant –’ Gunilla
scowled. ‘Stop confusing me!’
Blitzen whimpered as she throttled him
with her light spear. Hearthstone edged next
to me, his fists clenched.
I raised my hands. ‘Gunilla, all I’m saying
is, if you don’t let us go so we can stop Surt –’
‘I warned you,’ Gunilla said. ‘Listening to
Samirah will only hasten Ragnarok. Feel fortunate I found you rather than the other
Valkyries who are hunting you, or your
former einherjar hallmates. They are anxious
to prove their loyalty to Valhalla by killing
you. I, at least, will make sure you get a proper trial before the thanes cast your soul into
Ginnungagap!’
Samirah and I exchanged glances. We
didn’t have time to be captured and sent
back to Asgard. I definitely didn’t have time
to get my soul cast into a place I couldn’t
even pronounce.

835/1044

Hearthstone saved us. His face became
transfixed with horror. He pointed behind
Gunilla as if Geirrod was rising from the
rubble. It was the oldest trick in the Nine
Worlds, and it worked.
Gunilla glanced behind her. Sam lunged
with blinding speed. Instead of trying to
tackle the Valkyrie captain, she simply
touched the golden bracer on Gunilla’s arm.
The air hummed as if someone had turned
on an industrial vacuum cleaner.
Gunilla shrieked. She stared at Sam in dismay. ‘What have you –’
The Valkyrie imploded. She collapsed into
a pinpoint of light and was gone.
‘Sam?’ I couldn’t believe what had
happened. ‘You – you killed her?’
‘Of course not!’ Sam swatted my arm.
(Thankfully, I did not implode.) ‘I just recalled her to Valhalla.’
‘The armband?’ asked Blitzen.

836/1044

Sam smiled modestly. ‘I didn’t know if it
would work. I guess my fingerprints haven’t
been de-registered from the Valkyrie database yet.’
Hearthstone rolled his hand. Explain.
‘Valkyrie armbands have an emergency
evacuation feature,’ Sam said. ‘If a Valkyrie
is wounded in battle and needs immediate
attention, another Valkyrie can send her
back to the Halls of Healing simply by touching her armband. She’ll be instantly extracted, but it’s powerful magic. One use and the
armband melts.’
I blinked. ‘So Gunilla got yanked to
Valhalla.’
‘Yep. But I haven’t bought us much time.
She’ll be back as soon as she gathers her
strength. I imagine she’ll bring reinforcements, too.’
‘Thor’s hammer,’ I said. ‘The storage
room.’

837/1044

We ran for the small iron door. I’d like to
say I had carefully planned the ceiling’s collapse to make sure the door didn’t get buried
in wreckage. In truth, I just got lucky.
Sam’s axe cut through the lock in one
swipe. Hearthstone yanked open the door.
Inside was a closet, empty except for an iron
pole the size of a broom handle leaning
against the corner.
‘Well,’ I said. ‘That’s kind of anticlimactic.’
Blitzen studied the iron pole. ‘I dunno, kid.
See this runework? It isn’t Mjolnir, but this
staff was forged with powerful magic.’
Sam’s face fell. ‘Oh … Thor’s weapon. Just
not the right weapon.’
‘Mmm.’ Blitzen nodded sagely.
‘Mmm,’ I agreed. ‘Would one of you tell
me what you’re talking about?’
‘Kid, this is Thor’s backup weapon,’ Blitz
explained. ‘The staff was a gift from a friend
of his – the giantess Grid.’

838/1044

‘Three questions,’ I said. ‘First: Thor has a
giantess friend?’
‘Yes,’ Blitz said. ‘Not all giants are bad.’
‘Second: do all giantess names begin with
G?’
‘No.’
‘Last question: Thor is a martial artist?
Does he have, like, backup nunchuks, too?’
‘Hey, kid, don’t dis the staff. It may not be
dwarven work like the hammer, but giantforged iron is still powerful stuff. I hope
we’re able to pick it up and carry it back to
Thor. I’m sure it’s heavy and protected by
enchantments.’
‘You needn’t worry about that!’ bellowed a
voice above.
From one of the high windows, the god of
thunder soared into the room on a chariot
pulled by Otis and Marvin. My sword Jack
floated along next to them.

839/1044

Thor landed in front of us in all his grungy
glory. ‘Good work, mortals!’ He grinned.
‘You found the staff. That’s better than
nothing!’
‘And, dude,’ said Jack, ‘I take one quick
bath. I turn around and not only have you
left the room but you’ve collapsed the exit.
What’s a sword supposed to think?’
I bit back a comment. ‘Yeah. Sorry, Jack.’
Thor reached out towards the supply
closet. The iron rod flew into his hand. Thor
executed a few thrusts, swipes and baton
twirls. ‘Yes, this will do nicely until I find
that – ah, other weapon which is not officially missing. Thanks!’
I tried to resist the urge to smack him.
‘You have a flying chariot?’
‘Of course!’ He laughed. ‘Thor without his
flying chariot would be like a dwarf without
an emergency parachute!’
‘Thank you,’ Blitz said.

840/1044

‘You could have flown us straight here,’ I
noted. ‘You could have saved us a day and a
half and several close calls with death. But
you let us climb that cliff, navigate a chasm
–’
‘I would never deprive you of the chance to
prove your heroism!’ the thunder god said.
Blitzen whimpered.
Hearthstone signed, I hate this god.
‘Exactly, Mr Elf!’ Thor said. ‘I gave you the
opportunity to prove your mettle. You’re
quite welcome!’
Otis bleated and clopped his hooves.
‘Besides, the boss couldn’t show up here
without his hammer, especially since his
daughter was stuck in that birdcage.’
Sam flinched. ‘You knew about that?’
Thor scowled at his goat. ‘Otis, we need to
have another talk about you keeping your
snout shut.’

841/1044

‘Sorry.’ Otis hung his horns. ‘Go ahead and
kill me. It’s fine.’
Marvin nipped him. ‘Will you shut up?
Every time you get killed, I get killed!’
Thor rolled his eyes at the ceiling. ‘ “What
kind of animals would you like pulling your
chariot, Thor?” my dad asked me. “Goats,” I
said. “Flying re-consumable goats would be
great.” I could’ve chosen dragons or lions,
but noooo.’ He faced Sam. ‘To answer your
question, yes, I sensed Gunilla was here. I
can usually tell when one of my children is
nearby. I figured, if you could save her, that
would be a nice bonus. But I also didn’t want
her learning about my missing hammer.
That information is a bit sensitive. You
should feel honoured I told you about it,
daughter of Loki.’
Sam inched away. ‘You know about that?
Listen, Lord Thor –’

842/1044

‘Girl, stop calling me lord. I’m a god of the
common people, not a lord! And don’t worry
– I won’t kill you. Not all of Loki’s brood is
evil. Even Loki himself …’ He heaved a sigh.
‘I kind of miss the guy.’
Sam looked at him sideways. ‘You do?’
‘Oh, sure.’ Thor scratched his red beard.
‘Most of the time I wanted to kill him, like
when he cut off all my wife’s hair, or convinced me to wear a bridal gown.’
‘Do what now?’ I asked.
‘But Loki made life interesting,’ Thor continued. ‘People got the idea we were brothers, which isn’t true. He was Odin’s blood
brother. Still, I understand how the rumour
got started. I hate to admit it, but Loki and I
made a good team.’
‘Like Marvin and me,’ Otis suggested. ‘My
therapist says –’
‘Shut up, you dolt!’ said Marvin.

843/1044

Thor twirled his iron staff. ‘At any rate,
thanks for this. It will help until I can find
that other item. And please DO NOT mention my loss to anyone. Not even my children. Especially not them. Otherwise I’d
have to kill you, and I might even feel bad
about that.’
‘But what will you do without Mjolnir?’
Sam asked. ‘How will you –’
‘Watch television?’ Thor shrugged. ‘I know
… the screen size and resolution on the end
of this staff are pitiful, but I will have to
make do. As for you, the island of Lyngvi
rises from the waves tonight. You must
hurry! Goodbye, mortals, and –’
‘Hold up,’ I said. ‘We need the location of
the island.’
Thor frowned. ‘Oh, right. I was supposed
to give that to you. Well, all you have to do is
seek out the dwarf brothers at the Long

844/1044

Wharf in Boston. They will take you to the island. Their boat usually leaves at sunset.’
‘Ah, dwarves.’ Blitz nodded approvingly.
‘We can trust them, then?’
‘Oh, no,’ Thor said. ‘They’ll try to kill you
at the first opportunity, but they do know the
way to the island.’
‘Lord Th– I mean, Thor,’ said Sam, ‘Won’t
you come with us? This is an important
battle – the fire lord Surt, Fenris Wolf.
Surely that’s worthy of your attention.’
Thor’s right eye twitched. ‘That’s a fine offer. Really. I’d love to, but I have another
pressing appointment –’
‘Game of Thrones,’ Marvin explained.
‘Shut up!’ Thor raised his staff over our
heads. ‘Use your time well, heroes. Prepare
for battle, and be at the Long Wharf by
sundown!’

845/1044

The room started to spin. Jack the sword
flew into my hand, flooding me with
exhaustion.
I braced myself against the nearest
column. ‘Thor, where are you sending us?’
The thunder god chuckled. ‘Wherever you
each need to go.’
Jotunheim collapsed around me like a tent
falling on my head.

FIFTY-EIGHT

What the Hel?

I stood alone in a snowstorm on Bunker Hill.
My exhaustion was gone. Jack had returned to pendant form around my neck.
None of that made sense, but I didn’t seem
to be dreaming.
I felt like I was really in Charlestown, just
across the river from Boston, standing right
where my fourth-grade school bus had
dropped us off for a class trip. Gauzy curtains of snow swept across the brownstones.
The park itself wasn’t much more than a
white field dotted with bare trees. In the
centre, a grey obelisk rose into the winter

848/1044

sky. After my time in Geirrod’s fortress, the
monument looked small and sad.
Thor had said I’d be sent where I needed
to go. Why did I need to be here, and where
were my friends?
A voice at my shoulder said, ‘Tragic, isn’t
it?’
I hardly flinched. I supposed I was getting
used to strange Norse entities popping up in
my personal space.
Standing next to me, gazing at the monument, was a woman with elven-pale skin and
long dark hair. In profile, she looked heartachingly beautiful, about twenty-five years
old. Her ermine cloak shimmered like a
snowdrift rippling in the wind.
Then she turned towards me, and my
lungs flattened against the back of my
ribcage.
The right side of the woman’s face was a
nightmare – withered skin, patches of blue

849/1044

ice covering decayed flesh, membrane-thin
lips over rotten teeth, a milky-white eye and
tufts of desiccated hair like black spiderwebs.
I tried to tell myself, Okay, this isn’t so
bad. She’s just like that guy Two-Face from
Batman. But Two-Face had always struck me
as kind of comical, like, come on, nobody
with that much facial damage could be alive.
The woman in front of me was very real.
She looked like someone who’d been stuck
halfway through a door when a devastating
blizzard struck. Or worse … some hideous
ghoul who’d tried to transform into a human,
only to get interrupted in the middle of the
process.
‘You’re Hel.’ My voice sounded like I was
five years old again.
She lifted her skeletal right hand, brushing
a tuft of hair behind her ear … or the stub of
frostbitten flesh that might once have been
an ear.

850/1044

‘I am Hel,’ she agreed. ‘Sometimes called
Hela, though most mortals dare not speak
my name at all. No jokes, Magnus Chase?
Who the Hel are you? What the Hel do you
want? You look Hela bad. I was expecting
more bravado.’
I was fresh out of bravado. The best I
could manage was not running away shrieking. Wind gusted around Hel, lifting a few
flakes of blackened skin from her zombie
forearm and swirling them into the snow.
‘Wh-what do you want?’ I asked. ‘I’m
already dead. I’m an einherji.’
‘I know that, young hero. I don’t want your
soul. I have plenty of those already. I called
you here to talk.’
‘You brought me? I thought Thor –’
‘Thor.’ The goddess scoffed. ‘If you want
someone who can navigate one hundred and
seventy channels of HD content, go to Thor.
If you want someone who can accurately

851/1044

send people through the Nine Worlds, he’s
not your guy.’
‘So –’
‘So I thought it was high time we talked.
My father did mention I’d be seeking you
out, yes? He gave you an exit strategy, Magnus: surrender the sword to your uncle. Remove it from play. This is your last opportunity. Perhaps you can take a lesson from
this place.’
‘Bunker Hill?’
She turned towards the monument so only
her mortal side was visible. ‘Sad and meaningless. Another hopeless battle, like the one
you’re about to engage in …’
Granted, my American history was a little
rusty, but I was pretty sure they didn’t build
monuments at the site of sad and meaningless events.

852/1044

‘Wasn’t Bunker Hill a victory? Americans
holding off the British at the top of the hill?
Don’t fire until you see …’
She fixed me with her milky zombie gaze,
and I couldn’t make myself say the whites of
their eyes.
‘For every hero, a thousand cowards,’ said
Hel. ‘For every brave death, a thousand
senseless ones. For every einherji … a thousand souls who enter my realm.’
She pointed with her withered hand.
‘Right over there, a British boy of your age
died behind a hay bale, crying for his mother. He was the youngest of his regiment. His
own commander shot him for cowardice. Do
you think he appreciates this lovely monument? And there, at the top of the hill, after
their ammunition ran out, your ancestors
threw rocks at the British, fighting like cavemen. Some fled. Some stayed and were

853/1044

butchered with bayonets. Which were
smarter?’
She smiled. I wasn’t sure which side of her
mouth was more ghastly – the living zombie,
or the beautiful woman who was amused by
massacres.
‘No one ever said the whites of their eyes,’
she continued. ‘That’s a myth, made up years
later. This isn’t even Bunker Hill. It’s Breed’s
Hill. And, though the battle was costly to the
British, it was an American defeat, not a victory. Such is human memory … you forget
the truth and believe what makes you feel
better.’
Snow melted against my neck, dampening
my collar. ‘What’s your point? I shouldn’t
fight? I should just let Surt free your brother
the Big Bad Wolf?’
‘I merely point out options,’ Hel said. ‘Did
Bunker Hill really affect the outcome of your
Revolution? If you face Surt tonight, will you

854/1044

delay Ragnarok or hasten it? Charging into
battle is what the hero would do – the sort of
person who ends up in Valhalla. But what of
the millions of souls who lived more careful
lives and died peacefully in their beds at an
old age? They ended up in my realm. Were
they not wiser? Do you really belong in Valhalla, Magnus?’
The words of the Norns seemed to spiral
around me in the cold. Wrongly chosen,
wrongly slain; a hero Valhalla cannot
contain.
I thought about my hallmate T.J., still carrying his rifle and wearing his Civil War coat,
charging up hills day after day in a series of
endless battles, waiting for his final death at
Ragnarok. I thought about Halfborn Gunderson, trying to stay sane by earning PhDs in
literature when he wasn’t going berserk and
smashing skulls. Did I belong with those
guys?

855/1044

‘Take the sword to your uncle,’ Hel urged.
‘Let events unfold without you. This is the
safer course. If you do so … my father Loki
has asked me to reward you.’
The skin on my face burned. I had an irrational fear that I might be decaying from
frostbite, becoming like Hel. ‘Reward me?’
‘Helheim is not such a terrible place,’ said
the goddess. ‘My hall has many fine chambers for my favoured guests. A reunion could
be arranged.’
‘A reunion …’ I could barely speak the
words. ‘With my mother? You have her?’
The goddess seemed to consider the question, tilting her head from the living side to
the dead. ‘I could have her. The status of her
soul, of everything that she was, is still in
flux.’
‘How …? I don’t –’
‘The prayers and wishes of the living often
affect the dead, Magnus. Mortals have

856/1044

always known that.’ She bared her teeth –
rotten on one side, pristine white on the other. ‘I cannot return Natalie Chase to life, but
I can unite you both in Helheim if you wish
it. I can bind your souls there so that you will
never be separated. You could be a family
again.’
I tried to imagine that. My tongue froze in
my mouth.
‘You need not speak,’ Hel said. ‘Only give
me an indication. Cry for your mother. Let
your tears fall, and I will know you agree. But
you must decide now. If you reject my offer,
if you insist on fighting your own Bunker Hill
tonight, I promise you will never see your
mother again in this life or any other.’
I thought about my mother skipping
stones with me at Houghton’s Pond, her
green eyes sparkling with humour. She
spread her arms in the sunlight, trying to explain what my father was like. That’s why I

857/1044

bring you here, Magnus. Can’t you feel it?
He’s all around us.
Then I imagined my mother in a cold, dark
palace, her soul bound for eternity. I remembered my own corpse in the funeral
home – an embalmed relic, dressed up for
display. I thought about the faces of the
drowned souls swirling in Ran’s net.
‘You are crying,’ Hel noted with satisfaction. ‘Then we have a deal?’
‘You don’t understand.’ I looked at the
goddess. ‘I’m crying because I know what my
mother would want. She’d want me to remember her as she was. That’s the only
monument she needs. She wouldn’t want to
be trapped, preserved, forced to live as a
ghost in some cold-storage underworld.’
Hel scowled, the right side of her face
wrinkling and crackling. ‘You dare?’
‘You want bravado?’ I pulled my pendant
from its chain. Jack the sword stretched to

858/1044

full length, his blade steaming in the cold.
‘Leave me alone. Tell Loki we have no deal. If
I see you again, I’ll cut you right down the
dotted line.’
I raised my blade.
The goddess dissolved into snow. My surroundings faded. Suddenly I found myself
balanced at the edge of a rooftop, five storeys
above a stretch of asphalt.

FIFTY-NINE

The Terror That Is
Middle School

Before I could plummet to my death,
someone grabbed me and pulled me back.
‘Whoa, there, cowboy,’ Sam said.
She was dressed in a new peacoat – navy
blue this time – with dark jeans and boots.
Blue wasn’t my favourite colour, but it made
her look dignified and serious, like an airforce officer. Her headscarf was freckled with
snow. Her axe wasn’t at her side; I guessed it
was tucked in the backpack over her
shoulder.

861/1044

She didn’t look surprised to see me. Then
again, her expression was preoccupied, her
gaze stuck somewhere in the distance.
My senses started to adjust. Jack was still
in my hand. For some reason, I didn’t feel
any exhaustion from his recent slaying of the
giant sisters.
Below us, the patch of asphalt was not exactly a playground – more like a holding area
between school buildings. Inside the chainlink fence, a few dozen students huddled in
cliques, chatting in doorways or pushing
each other around the icy ground. They
looked like seventh-graders, though it was
hard to be sure with everybody in their dark
winter coats.
I willed my sword back into pendant form
and returned it to its chain. I figured I
shouldn’t be walking on the roof of a school
with a broadsword.
‘Where are we?’ I asked Sam.

862/1044

‘My old stomping ground.’ Her voice had a
bitter edge. ‘Malcolm X Middle School.’
I tried to imagine Sam down in that courtyard, mingling with those cliques of girls, her
headscarf the only splash of colour in the
crowd.
‘Why did Thor send you back to middle
school?’ I asked. ‘That seems especially
cruel.’
She smirked. ‘He actually transported me
home. I appeared in my bedroom, just in
time for Jid and Bibi to barge in and demand
to know where I’d been. That conversation
was worse than middle school.’
My heart sank. I’d been so focused on my
own problems I’d forgotten that Sam was
trying to balance a normal life on top of
everything else. ‘What did you tell them?’
‘That I’d been staying with friends. They’ll
assume I meant Marianne Shaw.’
‘Rather than three strange guys.’

863/1044

She hugged her arms. ‘I told Bibi I tried to
text her, which is true. She’ll assume it was
her fault. Bibi is hopeless with phones. Actually, Jotunheim just has no reception. I – I
try not to actually lie, but I hate misleading
them. After everything they’ve done for me,
they worry I’m going to get in trouble, turn
out like my mom.’
‘You mean a successful doctor who liked to
help people? Gee, that would be terrible.’
She gave me an eye roll. ‘You know what I
mean – a rebel, an embarrassment. They
locked me in my room, told me I was grounded until Doomsday. I didn’t have the heart
to tell them that might be tonight.’
The wind picked up, spinning the old metal roof fans like pinwheels.
‘How did you sneak out?’ I asked.
‘I didn’t. I just appeared here.’ She gazed
down into the courtyard. ‘Maybe I needed a
reminder of how it all started.’

864/1044

My brain felt as rusty as the roof fans, but
one thought gained traction and started to
spin. ‘This is where you became a Valkyrie.’
Sam nodded. ‘A frost giant … he’d got into
the school somehow. Maybe looking for me,
maybe hunting some other demigod. He
wrecked a few classrooms, caused a panic.
He didn’t seem to care if there were mortal
casualties. The school went on lockdown.
They didn’t know what they were dealing
with. They thought some crazy human was
making a scene. They called the police, but
there was no time …’
She slipped her hands into her coat pockets. ‘I taunted the giant – insulted his mom,
that kind of thing. I lured him up here to the
roof and …’ She looked below us. ‘The giant
couldn’t fly. He landed right there on the asphalt and shattered into a million shards of
ice.’
She sounded strangely embarrassed.

865/1044

‘You took on a giant single-handed,’ I said.
‘You saved your school.’
‘I suppose,’ she said. ‘The staff, the police
… they never figured out what happened.
They thought the guy must’ve fled the scene.
In the confusion, nobody noticed what I’d
done … except Odin. After the giant died, the
All-Father appeared in front of me, right
where you’re standing. He offered me a job
as a Valkyrie. I accepted.’
After my conversation with Hel, I didn’t
think it was possible for me to feel worse.
The loss of my mother still stung as painfully
as the night she’d died. But Sam’s story made
me feel bad in a different way. Sam had
brought me to Valhalla. She’d lost her place
among the Valkyries because she believed I
was a hero – a hero like her. And, despite all
that had happened since, she didn’t seem to
blame me.

866/1044

‘Do you regret it?’ I asked. ‘Taking my soul
when I fell?’
She laughed under her breath. ‘You don’t
get it, Magnus. I was told to bring you to Valhalla. And not by Loki. By Odin himself.’
My pendant heated up against my collarbone. For an instant, I smelled warm roses
and strawberries, as if I’d stepped through a
pocket of summer.
‘Odin,’ I said. ‘I thought he was missing …
hadn’t appeared since you became a
Valkyrie.’
‘He told me to say nothing.’ Sam shivered.
‘I guess I failed in that, too. The night before
your fight with Surt, Odin met me outside
my grandparents’ house. He was disguised as
a homeless guy – a ratty beard, an old blue
coat, a broad-brimmed hat. But I knew who
he was. The eye patch, the voice … He told
me to watch for you and, if you fought well,
to bring you to Valhalla.’

867/1044

Down in the courtyard, a period bell rang.
The students headed inside, jostling and
laughing. For them, it was a normal school
day – the kind of day I could hardly
remember.
‘I was wrongly chosen,’ I said. ‘The Norns
told me I wasn’t supposed to be in Valhalla.’
‘Yet you were,’ Sam said. ‘Odin foresaw it.
I don’t know why the contradiction, but we
have to finish this quest. We have to reach
that island tonight.’
I watched the snow erase footprints in the
empty yard. Soon there’d be no more trace of
the students than there was of the frost giant’s impact from two years ago.
I wasn’t sure what to think about Odin
choosing me for Valhalla. I suppose I
should’ve felt honoured. The All-Father himself thought I was important. He had chosen
me, no matter what the Norns said. But, if
that was true, why hadn’t Odin bothered to

868/1044

meet me in person? Loki was bound on a
slab for eternity. He’d found a way to talk to
me. Mimir was a severed head. He’d made
the trip. But the All-Father, the great sorcerer who could supposedly bend reality just by
speaking a rune – he couldn’t find the time
for a quick check-in?
Hel’s voice echoed in my head: Do you
really belong in Valhalla, Magnus?
‘I just came from Bunker Hill,’ I told Sam.
‘Hel offered me a reunion with my mother.’
I managed to tell her the story.
Samirah reached out as if to touch my
arm, then apparently changed her mind. ‘I’m
so sorry, Magnus. But Hel lies. You can’t
trust her. She’s just like my father, only
colder. You made the right choice.’
‘Yeah … still. You ever do the right thing,
and you know it’s the right thing, but it
leaves you feeling horrible?’

869/1044

‘You’ve just described most days of my
life.’ Sam pulled up her hood. ‘When I became a Valkyrie … I’m still not sure why I
fought that frost giant. The kids at Malcolm
X were terrible to me. The usual garbage:
they asked me if I was a terrorist. They
yanked off my hijab. They slipped disgusting
notes and pictures into my locker. When that
giant attacked … I could’ve pretended to be
just another mortal and got myself to safety.
But I didn’t even think about running away.
Why did I risk my life for those kids?’
I smiled.
‘What?’ she demanded.
‘Somebody once told me that a hero’s
bravery has to be unplanned – a genuine response to a crisis. It has to come from the
heart, without any thought of reward.’
Sam huffed. ‘That somebody sounds pretty
smug.’

870/1044

‘Maybe you didn’t need to come here,’ I
decided. ‘Maybe I did. To understand why
we’re a good team.’
‘Oh?’ She arched an eyebrow. ‘Are we a
good team now?’
‘We’re about to find out.’ I gazed north into the snowstorm. Somewhere in that direction lay downtown Boston and Long Wharf.
‘Let’s find Blitzen and Hearthstone. We’ve
got a fire giant to extinguish.’

SIXTY

A Lovely Homicidal
Sunset Cruise

Blitz and Hearth were waiting for us outside
the New England Aquarium.
Blitz had scored a new outfit, of course:
olive-coloured fatigues, a yellow ascot necktie and a matching yellow pith helmet with
yellow sun-proof netting. ‘My wolf-hunting
clothes!’ he told us cheerfully.
He explained how Thor’s magic had transported him where he most needed to be: the
best department store in Nidavellir. He’d
used his Svartalf Express Card to charge a

873/1044

number of expeditionary supplies, including
several spare outfits and a retractable bonesteel harpoon.
‘Not only that,’ Blitz said, ‘but the contest
scandal with Junior? It backfired on the old
maggot! Word got around about how badly
he failed. Nobody is blaming me any more,
or the horsefly, or anything! People started
talking about my stylish armour designs, and
now they’re clamouring for product. If I live
through tonight, I might get to start my own
clothing line after all!’
Sam and I both congratulated him, though
living through the night did seem like a
pretty big if. Nevertheless, Blitz was so happy
I didn’t want to bring him down. He started
bouncing on his heels, singing ‘Sharp
Dressed Dwarf’ under his breath.
As for Hearth, he’d done a different kind
of shopping. He was now carrying a polished
staff of white oak. At the top, the staff split

874/1044

into a Y like a slingshot. I got the feeling – I
don’t know how – that a piece was missing
between the two prongs.
With his staff in hand, Hearth looked like
a proper sword-and-sorcery elf – except that
he was still wearing black jeans, a leather
jacket over a HOUSE OF BLUES T-shirt and a
candy-striped scarf.
Hearth rested the staff in the crook of his
arm and explained in signs how he’d ended
up at Mimir’s Well. The Capo had pronounced him a full master of alf seidr, ready
to use a sorcerer’s staff.
‘Isn’t that awesome?’ Blitzen clapped him
on the back. ‘I knew he could do it!’
Hearthstone pursed his lips. I don’t feel
like a master.
‘I’ve got something that might help.’ I
reached in my pocket and pulled out the
runestone perthro. ‘A couple of hours ago I

875/1044

had a conversation with Hel. She reminded
me of everything I’ve lost.’
I told them what the half-zombie goddess
had offered me.
‘Ah, kid …’ Blitzen shook his head. ‘Here
I’ve been going on about my new clothing
line and you had to deal with that.’
‘It’s okay,’ I assured him. Strangely, it did
feel okay. ‘The thing is, when I appeared on
Bunker Hill, I’d just used my sword to kill
two giantesses. I should’ve passed out or
died from exhaustion. I didn’t. I think I know
why.’
I turned the runestone between my fingers. ‘The longer I’m with you guys, the easier it gets to use my sword, or heal, or do anything, really. I’m no magic expert, but I think
… somehow, we’re sharing the cost.’
I held out the rune for Hearthstone. ‘I
know what it feels like to be an empty cup, to
have everything taken away from you. But

876/1044

you’re not alone. However much magic you
need to use, it’s okay. We’ve got you. We’re
your family.’
Hearth’s eyes rimmed with green water.
He signed to us, and this time I think he actually meant I love you and not the giantesses are drunk.
He took the rune and set it between the
prongs of his new staff. The stone snapped
into place the same way my pendant did on
its chain. The symbol perthro glowed with a
gentle gold light.
My sign, he announced. My family’s sign.
Blitzen sniffled. ‘I like that. A family of
four empty cups!’
Sam wiped her eyes. ‘Suddenly I feel
thirsty.’
‘Al-Abbas,’ I said, ‘I nominate you for the
role of annoying sister.’
‘Shut up, Magnus.’ She straightened her
coat, shouldered her backpack and took a

877/1044

deep breath. ‘All right. If we’re done with the
family bonding, I don’t suppose anyone
knows where we can find two dwarves with a
boat?’
‘I do.’ Blitzen fluffed his ascot. ‘Hearth and
I scouted it out before you got here. Come
on!’
He led the way down the pier. I think he
just wanted us to appreciate how well he
swaggered in his new yellow pith helmet.
At the end of Long Wharf, across from the
closed-for-the-season kiosk for whale-watching tours, another kiosk had been cobbled together from plywood scraps and cardboard
appliance boxes. Above the service window, a
sloppily finger-painted sign read: WOLFWATCHING CRUISE. TONIGHT ONLY! ONE RED GOLD
PER PERSON! CHILDREN UNDER FIVE FREE!

Sitting in the booth was a dwarf who was
definitely less svartalf and more maggot.

878/1044

About two feet tall, he had so much facial
hair it was impossible to tell if he had eyes or
a mouth. He was dressed in a yellow raincoat
and a captain’s hat, which no doubt protected him from the dim daylight and also made
him look like the mascot for a gnomish
lobster-restaurant franchise.
‘Hello, there!’ said the dwarf. ‘Fjalar, at
your service. Care to take the cruise? Lovely
wolf-spotting weather!’
‘Fjalar?’ Blitzen’s face sagged. ‘You
wouldn’t happen to have a brother named
Gjalar?’
‘Right over there.’
I wasn’t sure how I’d missed it, but docked
a few feet away was a Viking longship fitted
with an outboard motor. At the stern, chewing on a piece of jerky, sat another dwarf
who looked exactly like Fjalar except he wore
grease-stained overalls and a floppybrimmed felt hat.

879/1044

‘I can see you’ve heard about our exceptional service,’ Fjalar continued. ‘So can I put
you down for four tickets? Once-a-year
opportunity!’
‘Excuse us a moment.’ Blitzen steered us
out of earshot. ‘Those are Fjalar and Gjalar,’
he whispered. ‘They’re notorious.’
‘Thor warned us,’ Sam said. ‘We don’t have
much choice.’
‘I know, but –’ Blitzen wrung his hands –
‘Fjalar and Gjalar? They’ve been robbing and
murdering people for over a thousand years!
They’ll try to kill us if we give them any
opportunity.’
‘So basically,’ I summed up, ‘they’re like
pretty much everyone else we’ve met.’
‘They’ll stab us in the back,’ Blitz fretted,
‘or strand us on a desert island, or shove us
overboard into the mouth of a shark.’
Hearth pointed to himself then tapped a
finger to his palm. I’m sold.

880/1044

We marched back to the kiosk.
I smiled at the homicidal lobster mascot.
‘We’d love four tickets, please.’

SIXTY-ONE

Heather Is My New Least
Favourite Flower

I didn’t think anything could be worse than
our fishing expedition with Harald. I was
wrong.
As soon as we left the harbour, the sky
darkened. The water turned as black as squid
ink. Through the haze of snow, the shoreline
of Boston morphed into something primeval
– the way it might have looked when
Skirnir’s descendant first sailed his longship
up the Charles.

883/1044

Downtown was reduced to a few grey hills.
The runways at Logan Airport turned to
sheets of ice floating on open water. Islands
sank and rose around us like a time-lapse
video of the last two millennia.
It occurred to me that I might be looking
at the future rather than the past – the way
Boston would appear after Ragnarok. I decided to keep that thought to myself.
In the quiet of the bay, Gjalar’s outboard
motor made an obscene amount of noise –
rattling, growling and coughing smoke as our
boat cut through the water. Any monsters
within a five-mile radius would know where
to find us.
At the prow, Fjalar kept watch, occasionally shouting warnings to his brother, ‘Rocks
to port! Iceberg to starboard! Kraken at two
o’clock!’
None of that helped calm my nerves. Surt
had promised we would meet tonight. He

884/1044

planned on burning my friends and me alive
and destroying the Nine Worlds. But in the
back of my mind lurked an even deeper fear.
I was about to meet the Wolf at last. That
realization dredged up every nightmare I’d
ever had about glowing blue eyes, white
fangs, feral snarls in the darkness.
Sitting next to me, Sam kept her axe across
her lap, where the dwarves could see it. Blitzen fussed with his yellow ascot, as if he
could intimidate our hosts with his wardrobe. Hearthstone practised making his new
staff appear and disappear. If he did it right,
the staff shot into his hand out of nowhere,
like a bouquet of flowers spring-loaded in a
magician’s sleeve. If he did it wrong, he
goosed Blitzen or whopped me upside the
back of the head.
After a few hours and a dozen staff-induced concussions, the boat shuddered like
we’d hit a cross-current. From the bow,

885/1044

Fjalar announced, ‘It won’t be long now.
We’ve entered Amsvartnir – Pitch-Black
Bay.’
‘Gee –’ I looked at the inky waves – ‘why
do they call it that?’
The clouds broke. The full moon, pale and
silver, peered down at us from a starless
void. In front of us, fog and moonlight wove
together, forming a coastline. I’d never hated
the full moon so much.
‘Lyngvi,’ Fjalar announced. ‘The Isle of
Heather, prison of the Wolf.’
The island looked like the caldera of an ancient volcano – a flattened cone maybe fifty
feet above sea level. I’d always thought of
heather as purple, but the rocky slopes were
carpeted with ghostly white flowers.
‘If that’s heather,’ I said, ‘there sure is a lot
of it.’
Fjalar cackled. ‘It’s a magical plant, my
friend – used to ward off evil and keep

886/1044

ghosts at bay. What better prison for Fenris
Wolf than an island entirely ringed with the
stuff?’
Sam rose. ‘If Fenris is as big as I’ve heard,
shouldn’t we be able to see him by now?’
‘Oh, no,’ Fjalar said. ‘You have to go ashore
for that. Fenris lies bound in the centre of
the island like a runestone in a bowl.’
I glanced at Hearthstone. I doubted he
could read Fjalar’s lips behind that bushy
beard, but I didn’t like the reference to a
runestone in a bowl. I remembered the other
meaning of perthro: a dice-rolling cup. I
didn’t want to run blindly into that caldera
and hope for Yahtzee.
When we were about ten feet from the
beach, the keel of the boat ground against a
sandbar. The sound reminded me unpleasantly of the night my mother died – our
apartment door creaking just before it burst
open.

887/1044

‘Out you go!’ Fjalar said cheerfully. ‘Enjoy
your walking tour. Just head over the ridge
there. I think you’ll find the Wolf well worth
the trip!’
Maybe it was my imagination, but my nostrils filled with the smell of smoke and wet
animal fur. My new einherji heart was testing the limits of how fast it could beat.
If it hadn’t been for my friends, I’m not
sure I would’ve had the courage to disembark. Hearthstone leaped over the side first.
Sam and Blitzen followed. Not wanting to be
stuck on the boat with lobster dwarf and his
jerky-eating brother, I swung my legs overboard. The waist-deep water was so cold I
imagined I would be singing soprano for the
rest of the week.
I slogged onto the beach, and a wolf’s howl
split my eardrums.
Now, sure … I’d been expecting a wolf.
Ever since childhood, wolves had terrified

888/1044

me, so I’d tried my best to gather my courage. But Fenris’s howl was unlike anything
I’d ever heard – a note of pure rage so deep it
seemed to shake me apart, breaking my molecules into random amino acids and icy
Ginnungagap run-off.
Safe in their boat, the two dwarves cackled
with glee.
‘I should have mentioned,’ Fjalar called to
us, ‘the ride back is a little more expensive.
All your valuables, please. Gather them together in one of your bags. Toss them to me.
Otherwise, we’ll leave you here.’
Blitzen cursed. ‘They’ll leave us here anyway. That’s what they do.’
At the moment, heading inland to confront
Fenris Wolf was very low on my wish list. At
the top of my wish list was: Cry and Plead
for the Treacherous Dwarves to Take Me
Back to Boston.

889/1044

My voice quavered, but I tried to act more
courageous than I felt.
‘Get lost,’ I told the dwarves. ‘We don’t
need you any more.’
Fjalar and Gjalar exchanged looks. Already
their boat was drifting further away.
‘Didn’t you hear the Wolf?’ Fjalar spoke
more slowly, as if he’d overestimated my intelligence. ‘You’re stuck on that island. With
Fenris. That’s a bad thing.’
‘Yeah, we know,’ I said.
‘The Wolf will eat you!’ Fjalar cried.
‘Bound or not, he will eat you. At dawn the
island will disappear and take you with it!’
‘Thanks for the lift,’ I said. ‘Pleasant trip
back.’
Fjalar flung up his hands. ‘Idiots! Suit
yourself. We’ll collect your valuables from
your skeletal remains next year! Come on,
Gjalar, back to the docks. We might have
time to pick up another load of tourists.’

890/1044

Gjalar revved the motor. The longship
turned and disappeared into the darkness.
I faced my friends. I got the feeling they
wouldn’t mind another rousing speech like,
We’re a family of empty cups and we will
dominate!
‘Well,’ I said, ‘after running from an army
of dwarves, facing a monster squirrel, killing
three giant sisters and butchering a pair of
talking goats … how bad can Fenris Wolf be?’
‘Very bad,’ Sam and Blitz said in unison.
Hearthstone made two OK signs, crossed
them at the wrists and flicked them apart –
the sign for awful.
‘Right.’ I pulled my sword from pendant
form. The blade’s glow made the heather
look even paler and more ghostly. ‘Jack, you
ready?’
‘Dude,’ said the sword, ‘I was forged ready.
Still, I get the feeling we’re walking into a
trap here.’

891/1044

‘Show of hands,’ I asked my friends, ‘is
anybody surprised by that?’
Nobody raised their hand.
‘Okay, cool,’ said Jack. ‘As long as you
realize you’ll probably all die in agony and
start Ragnarok, I’m down. Let’s do this!’

SIXTY-TWO

The Small Bad Wolf

I remember the first time I saw Plymouth
Rock.
My reaction was, ‘That’s it?’
Same with the Liberty Bell in Philadelphia
and the Empire State Building in New York –
up close and personal, they seemed smaller
than I’d imagined, not worth the hype.
That’s how I felt when I saw Fenris Wolf.
I’d heard all these terrible stories about
him: the gods were too scared to feed him;
he could break the strongest chains; he’d
eaten Tyr’s hand; he was going to swallow
the sun on Doomsday; he was going to

894/1044

devour Odin in a single bite. I’d expected a
wolf bigger than King Kong with
flamethrower breath, death-ray eyes and
laser nostrils.
What I got instead was a Wolf the size of a
wolf.
We stood at the top of the ledge, looking
down into the valley where Fenris sat calmly
on his haunches. He was larger than an average Labrador retriever, but definitely no bigger than me. His legs were long and muscular, built for running. His shaggy grey coat
swirled with tufts of black. Nobody would’ve
called him cute – not with those gleaming
white fangs, or the bones littering the ground
around his paws – but he was a handsome
animal.
I’d been hoping to find the Wolf lying on
his side, hog-tied and fastened to the ground
with nails, staples, duct tape and Krazy Glue.
Instead, the golden rope Gleipnir restrained

895/1044

him more like the leg irons used to transport
criminals. The glimmering cord was tied
around all four of his ankle joints, allowing
enough slack for the Wolf to shuffle around.
Part of the rope had apparently once been
tied around the Wolf’s snout like a muzzle.
That section now fell across his chest in a
loose loop. The rope didn’t even appear to be
anchored to the ground. I wasn’t sure what
was keeping Fenris from leaving the island
unless there was one of those doggy no-no
invisible fences around the perimeter.
All in all, if I were the god Tyr, getting my
hand bitten off so the other gods would have
time to bind the Wolf, I would’ve been pretty
torqued off at this shoddy work. Didn’t the
Aesir have one decent god of knots?
I glanced at my friends. ‘Where’s the real
Fenris? That has to be a decoy, right?’
‘No.’ Sam’s knuckles whitened on the
handle of her axe. ‘That’s him. I can sense it.’

896/1044

The Wolf turned towards the sound of our
voices. His eyes shone with a familiar blue
light that sent a xylophone mallet down the
back of my ribcage.
‘Well.’ His voice was deep and rich. His
black lips curled in a very human sneer.
‘Who do we have here? Have the gods sent
me a snack?’
I revised my impression of the Wolf.
Maybe his size was ordinary. Maybe he
didn’t sneeze laser beams. But his eyes were
colder and more intelligent than any predator I’d ever encountered – animal or human.
His snout quivered as if he could smell the
fear on my breath. And his voice … his voice
flowed over me like molasses, dangerously
smooth and sweet. I remembered my first
feast in Valhalla, when the thanes didn’t
want Sam to speak in her defence because
they feared the silver tongue of Loki’s children. Now I understood.

897/1044

The last thing I wanted to do was approach
the Wolf. Yet his tone said, Come on down.
We’re all friends here.
The entire caldera was maybe a hundred
yards across, which meant the Wolf was
much closer than I would’ve liked. The
ground sloped gently, but the heather was
slick under my feet. I was terrified I might
slip and slide right between the Wolf’s paws.
‘I’m Magnus Chase.’ My voice was not as
smooth as molasses. I forced myself to meet
Fenris’s gaze. ‘We have an appointment.’
The Wolf bared his teeth. ‘We do indeed,
son of Frey. Vanir-spawn have such an interesting scent. Normally I only get to devour
the children of Thor, or Odin, or my old
friend Tyr.’
‘Sorry to disappoint.’
‘Oh, not at all.’ The wolf paced, the rope
gleaming between his feet, barely slowing his

898/1044

gait. ‘I’m quite pleased. I’ve been waiting a
long time for this.’
On my left, Hearthstone banged his white
oak staff against the rocks. The heather
plants glowed brighter, a fine silvery mist
rising from them like a lawn-sprinkler system. With his free hand, Hearth signed to
me, Flowers make the prison. Stay within.
Fenris Wolf chuckled. ‘The elf is wise. Not
powerful enough – not nearly powerful
enough to face me – but he is right about the
heather. I can’t stand the stuff. Funny,
though … how many brave mortals choose to
leave its safety and come within my reach.
They want to test their skill against me, or
perhaps they simply want to make sure I am
still bound.’ The Wolf leered at Blitzen. ‘Your
father was one of those. A noble dwarf with
the best of intentions. He approached me.
He died. His bones are around here
somewhere.’

899/1044

Blitzen let loose a guttural scream. Sam
and I had to restrain him to keep him from
charging the Wolf with his new harpoon.
‘Quite sad, really,’ the Wolf mused. ‘Bilì
was his name? He was right, of course. This
ridiculous rope has been loosening for ages.
At one time, I was completely unable to walk.
After a few centuries, I managed to hobble. I
still can’t cross the heather. The further I
move from the centre of the island, the more
the rope tightens and the more pain I endure. But it’s progress! The real breakthrough came … oh, a little over two years
ago, when I finally managed to shake that
cursed muzzle off my snout!’
Sam faltered. ‘Two years ago …’
The Wolf tilted his head. ‘That’s right, little
sister. Surely you knew. I began whispering
in the dreams of Odin – what a fine idea it
would be to make you, the daughter of Loki,

900/1044

a Valkyrie! What a fine way to turn a potential enemy into a valuable friend.’
‘No,’ Sam said. ‘Odin would never listen to
you.’
‘Would he not?’ The Wolf snarled with
pleasure. ‘That’s the wonderful thing about
you so-called good folk. You hear what you
want to believe. You think your conscience is
whispering to you when it is, perhaps, the
Wolf instead. Oh, you have done very well,
little sister, bringing Magnus to me –’
‘I didn’t bring him to you!’ Sam shouted.
‘And I’m not your little sister!’
‘No? I smell the changeling blood in your
veins. You could be powerful. You could
make our father proud. Why do you fight it?’
The Wolf’s teeth were as sharp as ever, his
leer just as vicious, but his voice filled with
sympathy, disappointment, melancholy. His
tone said, I could help you. I am your
brother.

901/1044

Sam took a step forward. I grabbed her
arm.
‘Fenris,’ I said, ‘you sent those wolves …
the night my mother died.’
‘Of course.’
‘You wanted to kill me –’
‘Now, why would I want that?’ His blue
eyes were worse than mirrors. They seemed
to reflect back at me all my failures – my
cowardice, my weakness, my selfishness in
running away when my mother needed me
most. ‘You were valuable to me, Magnus. But
you needed … seasoning. Hardship is wonderful for cultivating power. And look! You
have succeeded – the first child of Frey
strong enough to find the Sword of Summer.
You have brought me the means to escape
these bonds at last.’
The world spun beneath me. I felt like I
was back on Stanley the horse – plummeting
with no reins, no saddle, no control. All this

902/1044

time, I’d assumed Fenris wanted me dead.
That’s why his wolves had attacked our
apartment. But his real target had been my
mother. He’d killed her to affect me. That
idea was even worse than believing my mom
had died to protect me. She’d died so this
monster could forge me into his harbinger –
a demigod capable of attaining the Sword of
Summer.
I was filled with so much rage I couldn’t
focus.
In my hand, the sword began to hum. I
realized how long Jack had been silent. He
pulled at my arm, tugging me forward.
‘Jack,’ I muttered. ‘Jack, what are you –?’
The Wolf laughed. ‘You see? The Sword of
Summer is destined to cut these bonds. You
cannot stop it. The children of Frey have
never been fighters, Magnus Chase. You
can’t hope to control the blade, much less
fight me with it. Your usefulness is at an end.

903/1044

Surt will arrive soon. The blade will fly to his
hands.’
‘Mistake …’ Jack murmured, tugging to escape my grip. ‘Mistake to bring me here.’
‘Yes,’ the Wolf purred. ‘Yes, it was, my fine
blade. Surt thinks all of this was his idea, you
understand. He’s an imperfect tool. Like
most fire giants, he’s a lot of hot air, more
bluster than brains, but he will serve his purpose. He’ll be very happy to take possession
of you.’
‘Jack, you’re my sword now,’ I said, though
I could barely hold on with both hands.
‘Cut the cord …’ Jack hummed insistently.
‘Cut the cord.’
‘Do it, Magnus Chase,’ said Fenris. ‘Why
wait for Surt? Cut me loose of your own free
will and I will be grateful. Perhaps I would
even spare you and your friends.’
Blitzen growled even better than the Wolf.
From his pack, he pulled out the new string,

904/1044

Andskoti. ‘I was ready to bind this mutt. Now
I think I might just strangle him.’
‘I agree,’ Samirah said. ‘He dies.’
I wanted more than anything to join them.
I wanted to charge the beast and run him
through. The Sword of Summer was supposed to be the sharpest blade in the Nine
Worlds. Surely it could cut wolf hide.
I think we would’ve done it, but Hearthstone swept his staff in front of us. The runestone perthro flared with gold light.
Look. The command was more a tremor
than a sound. I turned and stared in
amazement at Hearthstone.
The bones. He didn’t use sign language. He
didn’t speak. His thought was simply there,
clearing my mind like wind through fog.
I looked again at the skeletons littering the
ground. All of them had been heroes – the
children of Odin, Thor or Tyr. Dwarves,

905/1044

humans, elves. They’d all been tricked, enraged, enchanted by Fenris. They’d all died.
Hearthstone was the only one of us who
couldn’t hear the Wolf’s voice. He was the
only one thinking clearly.
Suddenly the sword was easier to control.
It didn’t stop fighting me, but I felt the balance shift slightly in my favour.
‘I’m not freeing you,’ I told the Wolf. ‘And
I don’t need to fight you. We’ll wait for Surt.
We’ll stop him.’
The Wolf sniffed the air. ‘Oh … too late for
that. You don’t need to fight me? Poor mortal … I don’t need to fight you, either. There
are others to do that for me. As I said, good
folk are so easy to manipulate, so ready to do
my work for me. Here are some now!’
Across the island, a voice yelled, ‘STOP!’
At the opposite side of the ridge stood our
old friend Gunilla with a Valkyrie on either
side of her. Fanning out to her left and right

906/1044

were my old hallmates: T.J., Halfborn, Mallory and X the half-troll.
‘Caught in the act of aiding the enemy,’
Gunilla said. ‘You’ve signed your own death
warrants!’

SIXTY-THREE

I Hate Signing My Own
Death Warrant

‘Well, well,’ said the Wolf. ‘I haven’t had this
much company since my binding party.’
Gunilla gripped her spear. She didn’t look
at the Wolf, as if ignoring him might make
him go away.
‘Thomas Jefferson Jr,’ she said, ‘you and
your hallmates take the prisoners. Go around
the edges, obviously. Slow and careful.’
T.J. didn’t look happy about it, but he nodded. His army jacket was buttoned up tight.
His bayonet gleamed in the moonlight.

909/1044

Mallory Keen gave me the stink eye, but that
could have been her version of a happy
greeting. The two of them went left, picking
their way across the rim of the crater while
the three Valkyries kept their spears pointed
at Fenris.
X lumbered to the right, followed by Halfborn, who was twirling his battleaxes and
whistling under his breath, as if this was a
pleasant stroll through a field of fallen
enemies.
‘Sam,’ I muttered, ‘if we’re taken –’
‘I know.’
‘No one will be here to stop Surt.’
‘I know.’
‘We can take them,’ Blitz said. ‘They’re not
wearing armour, much less fashionable
armour.’
‘No,’ I said. ‘These are my shield bro – my
shield siblings. Let me try talking to them.’
Hearth signed, Crazy. You?

910/1044

The beauty of sign language. He could’ve
meant Are you crazy? Or I’m crazy. Just like
you! I decided to interpret it as a show of
support.
Fenris Wolf sat on his haunches and tried
to scratch his ear, which wasn’t possible with
the cord binding his legs.
He sniffed the air and grinned at me. ‘Interesting company you keep, Magnus Chase.
Someone is hiding, but I can smell him.
Which one is he, eh? Perhaps I will get a
feast today after all!’
I glanced at Sam. She looked just as mystified as I felt.
‘Sorry, fuzzball,’ I said. ‘No idea what
you’re talking about.’
Fenris laughed. ‘We shall see. I wonder if
he will dare to show his true face.’
‘Chase!’ Gunilla plucked a hammer from
her bandolier. ‘Do not speak with the Wolf
again or I will cave in your skull.’

911/1044

‘Gunilla,’ I said, ‘great to see you again,
too. Surt is on his way right now. We don’t
have time for this.’
‘Oh? Have you made common cause with
the fire lord who killed you? Or perhaps that
was part of the plan from the beginning – to
get you into Valhalla.’
Sam sighed. ‘For a child of Thor, you think
too much.’
‘And you, daughter of Loki, listen too little.
Jefferson, hurry it up!’
My hallmates got to either side of us.
Mallory made a tsk-tsk sound. ‘You led us
on quite a chase, Chase.’
‘Clever,’ I said. ‘How long have you been
waiting to use that line?’
Mallory smirked.
Next to her, X wiped beads of green sweat
from his forehead. ‘Wolf’s rope is loose. This
is not good.’

912/1044

From across the valley, Gunilla yelled, ‘No
fraternizing! I want them in chains!’
T.J. dangled four sets of handcuffs from
his finger. ‘Here’s the thing, Magnus: Gunilla
made it clear that if we don’t prove our loyalty to Valhalla by apprehending you we will
spend the next hundred years in the boiler
room shovelling coal. So consider yourself
under arrest, blah, blah, blah.’
Halfborn grinned. ‘But the other thing is:
we’re Vikings. We’re pretty bad at following
orders. So consider yourself free again.’
T.J. let the handcuffs slip from his finger.
‘Oops.’
My spirits lifted. ‘You mean –’
‘He means, you idiot,’ Mallory said, ‘that
we’re here to help.’
‘I love you guys.’
‘What do you need us to do?’ T.J. asked.
Sam nodded to Blitzen. ‘Our dwarf has a
rope to rebind the Wolf. If we can –’

913/1044

‘Enough!’ Gunilla shouted. On either side,
her Valkyrie lieutenants readied their spears.
‘I will take you all back in chains if I must!’
Fenris howled with pleasure. ‘That would
be delightful to watch. Unfortunately,
Valkyrie, you are too slow. My other friends
have arrived, and they won’t be taking any
prisoners.’
X gazed towards the south, his neck
muscles rippling like freshly poured cement.
‘There.’
At the same moment, Hearthstone pointed
with his staff, the whole length of white oak
suddenly burning with gold fire.
On the ridge to the right, between the
Valkyries and us, a dozen fire giants marched
into view. Each stood about ten feet tall.
They wore leather-scale armour, carried
swords the size of plough blades, and had
various axes and knives hanging from their
belts. Their complexions were an assortment

914/1044

of volcanic colours – ash, lava, pumice, obsidian. The fields of heather may have been
noxious to the Wolf, but the stuff didn’t seem
to bother the fire giants. Wherever they
stepped, the plants burned and smoked.
In the middle of their line stood Satan’s
fashion consultant himself, the fire lord Surt,
wearing a trim-cut three-piece suit of chain
mail, a tie and a shirt that appeared to be
woven from flame – elegantly accessorized
with a burning scimitar in his hand. He
looked pretty good, despite the fact that his
nose was still cut off. That fact, at least, made
me happy.
Blitzen clenched his teeth. ‘That’s my
design. He stole my design.’
‘Magnus Chase!’ Surt’s voice boomed. ‘I
see you have brought my new sword.
Excellent!’
Jack almost leaped out of my hands. I
must have looked ridiculous trying to keep

915/1044

him under control, like a fireman wrestling a
high-pressure hose.
‘My master …’ Jack said. ‘He shall be my
master.’
Surt laughed. ‘Surrender the sword and I
will kill you quickly.’ He sneered at Gunilla
and her two lieutenants. ‘As for Odin’s
wenches, I make no promises.’
Fenris Wolf rose and stretched. ‘Lord Surt,
as much as I love posturing and threats, can
we move things along? Moonlight is awasting.’
‘T.J.,’ I said.
‘Yeah?’
‘You asked how you could help. My friends
and I need to rebind Fenris Wolf. Can you
keep those fire giants busy?’
T.J. smiled. ‘I charged uphill against seventeen hundred Confederates. I think I can
handle a dozen fire giants.’

916/1044

He called across the valley, ‘Captain
Gunilla, are you with us? Because I’d rather
not fight another Civil War.’
Gunilla scanned the army of fire giants.
Her expression soured, as if she found them
even more repugnant than she found me.
She raised her spear. ‘Death to Surt! Death to
the enemies of Asgard!’
She and her lieutenants charged at the
giants.
‘I guess we’re in business,’ T.J. said. ‘Fix
bayonets!’

SIXTY-FOUR

Whose Idea Was It to
Make This Wolf
Unkillable?

Valhalla’s daily combat training finally made
sense to me. After the terror and chaos of
war in the hotel courtyard, I was more prepared to face Fenris Wolf and the fire giants,
even if they didn’t have AK-47s or chests
painted with COME AT ME, BRO!
I was still having trouble controlling the
sword, though. The only thing that helped:
Jack now seemed divided between wanting
to fly to Surt’s hand or flying towards the

919/1044

Wolf. Lucky for me, I needed to approach the
Wolf.
Sam knocked a giant’s thrown axe out of
the air. ‘Rebinding Fenris – any idea how
we’re doing that?’
‘Yes,’ I said. ‘Maybe. Not really.’
A fire giant charged in our direction. Blitzen was so angry – between the Wolf gloating about his dad’s death and Surt stealing
his fashion ideas – that he howled like Crazy
Alice in Chinatown and rammed his harpoon
right through the giant’s gut. The fire giant
stumbled off, belching flames and taking the
harpoon with him.
Hearthstone pointed to the Wolf. Idea, he
signed. Follow me.
‘I thought we needed to stay in the heather,’ I recalled.
Hearthstone raised his staff. Across the
ground at his feet, a rune spread like a
shadow:

920/1044

Heather bloomed around it, sprouting new
tendrils.
‘Algiz,’ Sam marvelled. ‘The rune of shielding. I’ve never seen it used.’
I felt as if I were seeing Hearthstone for
the first time. He didn’t stumble. He didn’t
faint. He strode confidently forward, the
flowers expanding before him like an unrolling carpet. Not only was Hearth immune
to the wolf’s voice, his rune magic was literally redrawing the boundaries of Fenris’s
prison.
We inched into the valley, following
Hearthstone. On the right side of the island,
my einherjar friends clashed with Surt’s
forces. Halfborn Gunderson buried his axe in
the breastplate of a giant. X picked up
another fire-breather and tossed him off the

921/1044

side of the ridge. Mallory and T.J. fought
back-to-back, jabbing and slashing and
dodging blasts of flame.
Gunilla and her two Valkyrie lieutenants
were fighting Surt himself. Between the shining white spears and the flaming sword, their
combat was almost too bright to watch.
My friends fought valiantly, but they were
outnumbered two-to-one. The fire giants
didn’t want to die. Even the one Blitzen had
harpooned was still staggering around, trying to blowtorch the einherjar with his bad
breath.
‘We have to hurry,’ I said.
‘Open to suggestions, kid,’ Blitzen said.
Fenris paced expectantly. He didn’t seem
concerned to see us shuffling towards him on
a carpet of heather, collectively armed with
an axe, a glowing white staff, an uncooperative sword and a ball of string.

922/1044

‘By all means, come down,’ he said. ‘Bring
that blade closer.’
Blitzen huffed. ‘I’ll tie him up. Hearth can
guard me. Magnus and Sam – you two keep
him from biting off my head for a few
minutes.’
‘Terrible idea,’ Sam said.
‘Got a better one?’ Blitz asked.
‘I do!’ Fenris lunged. He could’ve torn my
throat out, but that wasn’t his plan. His front
paws passed on either side of my sword. Jack
cheerfully cooperated, slicing the rope in
half.
Sam brought down her axe between the
Wolf’s ears, but Fenris leaped out of the way.
His back legs were still hobbled, but his front
paws were free. The Wolf’s coat steamed
from contact with the heather. Blisters
swelled all over his legs, but he sounded too
delighted to care.

923/1044

‘Oh, that’s wonderful,’ he crowed. ‘Just the
back legs now, please. Then we can get Ragnarok under way!’
All the rage that had built inside me for
two years boiled to the surface.
‘Blitz,’ I said, ‘do what you need to do. I’m
going to knock this mutt’s teeth out.’
I ran at the Wolf – possibly my worst idea
ever. Sam charged in next to me.
Fenris might have been the size of a normal wolf, but, even with his back legs
hobbled, his speed and strength were impossible to match.
As soon as I stepped from the edge of the
heather, he became a blur of claws and teeth.
I stumbled and fell, a line of deep cuts across
my chest. Fenris would’ve torn me open if
Sam’s axe hadn’t slammed him aside.
The Wolf snarled. ‘You can’t hurt me. The
gods couldn’t hurt me. Don’t you think they
would’ve slit my throat if they could have?

924/1044

My destiny is fixed. Until Ragnarok, I am
unkillable!’
‘Must be nice.’ I stumbled to my feet. ‘But
it won’t keep me from trying.’
Unfortunately, Jack wasn’t helping. Every
time I tried to attack, the sword turned and
swerved, doing its best to cut the rope
around the Wolf’s back legs. My fight with
the Wolf was more like a game of piggy-inthe-middle.
Blitzen lunged forward, the end of Andskoti tied in a noose. He tried to snare the
Wolf’s hindquarters, but he might as well
have been moving in slow motion. Fenris
stepped aside, dodging another strike from
Sam’s axe. The Wolf slashed Blitzen across
the throat and the dwarf fell face down. The
string rolled away.
‘NO!’ I yelled.
I moved towards Blitzen, but Hearthstone
was faster.

925/1044

He slammed his staff across Fenris’s skull.
Golden fire blazed. The Wolf clambered
away, whining in pain. A rune mark now
steamed on his forehead – a simple arrow
seared into the grey fur:

‘Tiwaz?’ The Wolf snarled. ‘You dare attack me with the rune of Tyr?’ The wolf
lunged at Hearthstone but seemed to hit an
invisible barrier. He stumbled and howled.
Sam appeared next to me. Her axe was
gone. Her left eye was swollen shut and her
hijab had been cut to shreds. ‘Hearth used
the rune of sacrifice,’ she said, her voice
quavering. ‘To save Blitz.’
‘What does that mean?’ I asked.
Hearth collapsed to his knees, leaning
against his staff. Still he managed to put
himself between the dwarf and the Wolf.

926/1044

‘You sacrifice your strength to shield your
friend?’ The Wolf laughed. ‘Fine. Enjoy your
spellwork. The dwarf is already dead. Your
own rune magic has doomed you. You can
watch while I deal with my other tasty prey.’
He bared his fangs at us.
Across the field, the battle was not going
well.
One of Gunilla’s Valkyries sprawled lifeless
on the rocks. The other one fell, her armour
burning from Surt’s sword. Gunilla faced the
fire lord alone, swinging her spear like a
whip of light, but she couldn’t last. Her
clothes smouldered. Her shield was charred
and cracked.
The einherjar were surrounded. Halfborn
had lost one of his axes. He was covered with
so many burns and gashes I didn’t understand how he could still be alive, but he just
kept fighting, laughing as he charged the giants. Mallory was on one knee, cursing as

927/1044

she parried attacks from three giants at once.
T.J. swung his rifle wildly. Even X looked
tiny compared to the enemies now looming
over him.
My head throbbed. I could feel my einherji
powers at work, trying to close the cuts on
my chest, but I knew Fenris could kill me
faster than I could possibly heal.
The Wolf sniffed, no doubt smelling my
weakness.
‘Ah, well,’ he chuckled. ‘A good try, Magnus, but the sons of Frey never were fighters.
All that’s left for me to do now is devour my
enemies. I love this part!’

SIXTY-FIVE

I Hate This Part

The strangest things can save your life. Like
lions. Or bulletproof ascots.
Fenris lunged at my face. I cleverly escaped by falling on my butt. A blurred shape
launched itself at the Wolf and knocked him
aside.
Two animals tumbled across the bone yard
in a whirl of fangs and claws. When they separated, I realized Fenris was facing a she-lion
with a swollen eye.
‘Sam?’ I yelped.
‘Get the rope.’ She kept her gaze on her enemy. ‘I need to have a talk with my brother.’

930/1044

The fact that she could speak in lion form
freaked me out even more than the fact that
she had a lion form. Her lips moved in a very
human way. Her eyes were the same colour.
Her voice was still Sam’s voice.
Fenris’s fur stood up on the back of his
neck. ‘So you accept your birthright as you
are about to die, little sister?’
‘I accept who I am,’ Sam said. ‘But not the
way you mean. I am Samirah al-Abbas.
Samirah of the Lion.’ She leaped at the Wolf.
They clawed, bit, kicked and howled. I’d
heard the term fur flying, but I’d never realized what a horrific thing it could be. The two
beasts literally tried to tear each other apart.
And one of those beasts was a friend of mine.
My first instinct was to charge into battle.
But that wouldn’t work.
Freya had told me that killing was the least
of the sword’s powers.

931/1044

The sons of Frey have never been fighters,
the Wolf had said.
So what was I?
Blitzen rolled over, groaning. Hearthstone
frantically checked the dwarf’s neck.
The ascot glittered. Somehow, it had
turned from yellow silk to woven metal, saving Blitzen’s throat in the process. It was
honest-to-Frigg bulletproof neckwear.
I couldn’t help grinning. Blitz was alive.
He had played to his strength.
He wasn’t a fighter. Neither was I. But
there were other ways to win a battle.
I snatched up the ball of string. It felt like
woven snow – impossibly soft and cold. In
my other hand, the sword became still.
‘What are we doing?’ Jack asked.
‘Figuring stuff out.’
‘Oh, cool.’ The blade quivered as if stretching after a nap. ‘How’s that going?’

932/1044

‘Better.’ I stabbed the end of the blade into
the ground. Jack did not try to fly away. ‘Surt
may get you someday,’ I said, ‘but he doesn’t
understand your power. I do now. We’re a
team.’
I looped the string’s noose around Jack’s
hilt and pulled it tight. The battle seemed to
fade around me. I stopped thinking about
how to fight the Wolf. He couldn’t be killed –
at least not now, not by me.
Instead, I focused on the warmth I felt
whenever I healed someone: the power of
growth and life – the power of Frey. The
Norns had told me nine days ago: The sun
must go east.
This place was all about night, winter and
silver moonlight. I needed to be the summer
sun.
Fenris Wolf noticed the change in the air.
He swiped at Sam and sent her tumbling
across the lawn of bones. His snout was

933/1044

shredded with claw marks. The rune of Tyr
glistened ugly and black on his forehead.
‘What are you up to, Magnus? None of
that!’ He lunged, but before he could reach
me he fell out of the air, twisting and howling
in pain.
Light surrounded me – the same golden
aura as when I’d healed Sam and Hearthstone in Jotunheim. It wasn’t hot like the
fires of Muspellheim. It wasn’t particularly
bright, but it obviously pained the Wolf. He
snarled and paced, squinting at me like I’d
become a spotlight.
‘Stop that!’ he howled. ‘Are you trying to
annoy me to death?’
Sam the lion struggled to her feet. She had
a nasty cut on her flank. Her face looked like
she’d rear-ended a tractor-trailer. ‘Magnus,
what are you doing?’
‘Bringing the summer.’

934/1044

The cuts on my chest mended. My strength
returned. My father was the god of light and
warmth. Wolves were creatures of darkness.
The power of Frey could constrain Fenris
just as it constrained the extremes of fire and
ice.
Sticking up from the ground, Jack
hummed with satisfaction. ‘Summer. Yeah, I
remember summer.’
I rolled out Andskoti until it trailed Jack
like a kite string.
I faced the Wolf. ‘An old dwarf once told
me that the most powerful crafting materials
are paradoxes. This rope is made of them.
But I’ve got one more – the final paradox
that will bind you: the Sword of Summer, a
weapon that wasn’t designed to be a weapon,
a blade that is best used by letting go of it.’
I willed Jack to fly, trusting he would do
the rest.

935/1044

He could have sliced the last of the Wolf’s
bonds. He could have flown across the battlefield straight into Surt’s hands, but he
didn’t. He zipped under the Wolf’s belly,
threading the cord Andskoti around his legs
faster than Fenris could react, binding him
and toppling him.
Fenris’s howl shook the island. ‘No! I will
not –!’
The sword zipped around his snout. Jack
tied off the rope in an aerial pirouette then
floated back to me, his blade glowing with
pride. ‘How’d I do, boss?’
‘Jack,’ I said, ‘you are one awesome
sword.’
‘Well, I know that,’ he said. ‘But how about
that rope-work, huh? That’s a perfect stevedore’s knot right there, and I don’t even have
hands.’
Sam stumbled towards us. ‘You did it! You
– ugh.’

936/1044

Her lion form melted into regular old Sam
– badly injured, face battered, her side
soaked with blood. Before she could fall, I
grabbed her and dragged her away from the
Wolf. Even fully bound, he thrashed and
frothed at the mouth. I didn’t want to be any
closer to him than I had to be.
Hearthstone staggered after me, holding
up Blitzen. The four of us fell together on a
bed of heather.
‘Alive,’ I said. ‘I wasn’t expecting that.’
Our moment of triumph lasted about …
well, one moment.
Then the sounds of battle became louder
and clearer around us, as if a curtain had
been ripped away. Hearthstone’s shielding
magic may have given us extra protection
against the Wolf, but it had also sealed us off
from the fight with the fire giants … and my
einherjar friends weren’t doing well.
‘To the Valkyrie!’ T.J. shouted. ‘Hurry!’

937/1044

He stumbled across the ridge, bayoneting
a fire giant and trying to reach Gunilla. All
this time, while we’d been dealing with the
Wolf, the Valkyrie captain had been holding
off Surt. Now she was on the ground, her
spear held weakly above her as Surt raised
his scimitar.
Mallory staggered around weaponless, too
far away and too bloodied to help. X was trying to dig his way out from beneath a pile of
giant corpses. Halfborn Gunderson sat
bloody and unmoving, his back propped
against a rock.
I processed this in a split second. Just as
quickly, I realized Hearth, Blitz, Sam and I
wouldn’t be there in time to make a
difference.
Nevertheless, I gripped my sword and
rose. I staggered towards Gunilla. Our eyes
met across the field, her last expression one
of resignation and anger: Make it count.

938/1044

The fire lord brought down his scimitar.

SIXTY-SIX

Sacrifices

I don’t know why it broke me so badly.
I didn’t even like Gunilla.
But when I saw Surt standing over her lifeless body, his eyes smouldering in triumph, I
wanted to fall down in the pile of bones and
stay there until Ragnarok.
Gunilla was dead. Her lieutenants were
dead. I didn’t even know their names, but
they’d sacrificed their lives to buy me time.
Halfborn was dead or dying. The other einherjar were not much better off. Sam and Blitz and Hearth were in no shape to fight.

941/1044

And Surt was still on his feet, as strong as
ever, his burning sword ready. Three of his
fire giants were also still alive and armed.
After all we’d been through, the fire lord
could kill me, take my sword and cut the wolf
free.
Judging from the smile on his face, Surt
expected to do just that.
‘I am impressed,’ he admitted. ‘The Wolf
told me you had potential. I don’t think even
Fenris expected you to do this well.’
The Wolf thrashed in his new magic
bonds.
A few feet from the fire lord, T.J.
crouched, his bayonet ready. He glanced at
me, waiting for a sign. I knew he was ready
to charge one last time, distract the giants if
it would help me, but I couldn’t let another
person die.
‘Go now,’ I told Surt. ‘Go back to
Muspellheim.’

942/1044

The fire lord threw back his head and
laughed. ‘Brave to the end! I think not, Magnus Chase. I think you will burn.’
He thrust out his hand. A column of fire
shot towards me.
I stood my ground.
I imagined being with my mom in the Blue
Hills on the first day of spring, the sunlight
warming my skin, gently thawing three
months of cold and darkness out of my
system.
My mom turned to me, her smile luminous: This is where I am, Magnus. In this moment. With you.
A sense of serenity anchored me. I remembered my mom once telling me how the
town houses in Back Bay, like our family’s
ancestral home, had been built on landfill.
Every so often, engineers had to sink new
pylons beneath the foundations to keep the

943/1044

buildings from collapsing. I felt like I’d had
my pylons reinforced. I was solid.
Surt’s flames rolled over me. They lost
their intensity. They were nothing but
ghostly flickers of warm orange, as harmless
as butterflies.
At my feet, the heather began to bloom –
white flowers spreading across the landscape, reclaiming the trampled and burned
areas where Surt’s warriors had walked,
soaking up the blood, covering the corpses of
the fallen giants.
‘The battle is over,’ I announced. ‘I consecrate this ground in the name of Frey.’
The words sent a shock wave in every direction. Swords, daggers and axes flew from
the fire giants’ hands. T.J.’s rifle spun from
his grasp. Even the weapons lying on the
ground were expelled from the island, blasted into the darkness like shrapnel.

944/1044

The only one left holding a weapon was
me.
Without his flaming scimitar, Surt didn’t
look so confident. ‘Tricks and childish magic,’ he snarled. ‘You cannot defeat me, Magnus Chase. That sword will be mine!’
‘Not today.’
I threw the blade. It spiralled towards
Surt, passing over the giant’s head. Surt
grabbed for it and missed.
‘What was that?’ The giant laughed. ‘An
attack?’
‘No,’ I said. ‘That was your exit.’
Behind Surt, Jack slashed the air, ripping
the fabric between the worlds. A zigzag of
fire burned on the ridge. My ears popped. As
if someone had shot out of the window in an
aeroplane’s pressurized cabin, Surt and the
other fire giants were sucked screaming into
the rift, which closed behind them.
‘Bye!’ Jack called. ‘Catch you later!’

945/1044

Except for the outraged snarling of the
Wolf, the island was silent.
I stumbled across the field. I fell to my
knees in front of Gunilla. I could tell immediately that the Valkyrie captain was gone. Her
blue eyes stared into the dark. Her bandolier
was empty of hammers. Her white spear lay
broken across her chest.
My eyes stung. ‘I’m sorry.’
For five hundred years she’d been in Valhalla, collecting the souls of the dead, preparing for the final battle. I remembered how
she’d scolded me: Even gazing upon Asgard,
you have no sense of reverence.
In death, her face seemed full of wonder
and awe. I hoped she was gazing upon Asgard the way she wanted it to be – filled with
Aesir, all the lights burning in her father’s
mansion.
‘Magnus,’ called T.J., ‘we have to go.’

946/1044

He and Mallory were struggling to carry
Halfborn Gunderson. X had managed to dig
his way out from under the fire-giant corpse
pile and was now carrying the two other
fallen Valkyries. Blitz and Hearthstone
stumbled along together, Sam close behind.
I picked up the body of the Valkyrie captain. She was not light, and my strength was
fading again.
‘We have to hurry.’ T.J. spoke as gently as
he could, but I heard the urgency in his tone.
The ground was shifting under my feet. I
realized my glowing aura had done more
than blind the wolf. The sunlight had affected the texture of the island. The island
was supposed to disappear at dawn. My magic had hastened the process, causing the
ground to dissolve into spongy mist.
‘Only seconds,’ Sam gasped. ‘Go.’

947/1044

The last thing I felt capable of was a burst
of speed, but somehow, carrying Gunilla, I
followed T.J. as he led the way to the shore.

SIXTY-SEVEN

One More, for a Friend

‘We’ve got a frey boat!’ yelled T.J.
I had no idea what a Frey boat was. I
didn’t see any boat on the beach, but I was
too stunned and exhausted to ask questions.
I felt like the extremes of heat and cold I’d
tolerated my entire life were now taking revenge. My forehead burned with fever. My
eyes felt close to boiling. My chest felt like a
block of ice.
I plodded along. The ground became softer
under my feet. The beach sank. The waves
rushed in. My arm muscles screamed under
the weight of the Valkyrie captain.

950/1044

I started veering sideways. Sam grabbed
my arm. ‘Just a little further, Magnus. Stay
with me.’
We got to the beach. T.J. pulled out a piece
of cloth like a handkerchief and tossed it into
the surf. Immediately the cloth expanded,
unfolding. By the count of ten, a full-size
Viking warship bobbed in the surf with two
oversized oars, a figurehead carved like a
wild boar and a green sail emblazoned with
the Hotel Valhalla logo. Along the side of the
prow, lettered in white, were the words:
HOTEL VALHALLA COURTESY VEHICLE.
‘In!’ T.J. jumped aboard first and reached
out to take Gunilla from me.
The wet sand pulled at my feet, but somehow I managed to get over the rail. Sam
made sure everyone else got in safely. Then
she climbed aboard.
A deep hum reverberated across the island, like a bass amp turned to maximum.

951/1044

The Isle of Heather sank beneath the black
waves. The ship’s sail tacked by itself. The
oars began to row, and the ship turned west.
Blitzen and Hearthstone collapsed at the
bow. They started arguing with each other
about which of them had taken the stupider
risks, but they were so tired the debate deteriorated into a half-hearted poking contest,
like a couple of second-graders.
Sam knelt next to Gunilla. She folded the
Valkyrie captain’s arms across her chest and
gently closed Gunilla’s blue eyes.
‘The others?’ I asked.
X lowered his head.
He had set the two Valkyries in the stern,
but it was clear they were gone. He folded
their arms like Gunilla’s. ‘Brave warriors.’ He
touched their foreheads with tenderness.
‘I didn’t know them,’ I said.

952/1044

‘Margaret and Irene.’ Sam’s voice was unsteady. ‘They – they never liked me much,
but … good Valkyries.’
‘Magnus,’ T.J. called from amidships, ‘we
need you.’
He and Mallory were kneeling next to
Halfborn Gunderson, whose berserker
strength had finally failed him. His chest was
a nightmarish patchwork of cuts and burns.
His left arm hung at an unnatural angle. His
beard and hair were sprinkled with blood
and small bits of heather.
‘Good – fight,’ he wheezed.
‘Don’t talk, you big idiot!’ Mallory sobbed.
‘How dare you get yourself hurt like this?’
He grinned sleepily. ‘Sorry … Mother.’
‘Hang in there,’ T.J. said. ‘We can get you
back to Vahalla. Then, if – if anything happens, you can be reborn.’
I put my hand on Halfborn’s shoulder. I
sensed damage so severe I almost pulled

953/1044

away. It was like forcing myself to explore a
bowl of glass shards.
‘There’s no time,’ I said. ‘We’re losing him.’
Mallory choked on tears. ‘Not an option.
No. Halfborn Gunderson, I hate you so
much.’
He coughed. Blood flecked his lips. ‘I hate
you too, Mallory Keen.’
‘Hold him still,’ I said. ‘I’ll do what I can.’
‘Kid, think about this,’ Blitz said. ‘You’re
already weak.’
‘I have to.’ I extended my senses, taking in
Halfborn’s broken bones, his internal bleeding, his bruised organs. Fear washed over
me. It was too much, too close to death. I
needed help.
‘Jack,’ I called.
The sword hovered to my side. ‘Boss?’
‘Halfborn is dying. I’ll need your strength
to help heal him. You can do that?’

954/1044

The sword hummed nervously. ‘Yeah. But,
boss, the second you take hold of me –’
‘I know. I’ll be even more exhausted.’
‘It’s not just binding the Wolf,’ Jack
warned. ‘I also helped with the aura of
golden light, which was pretty cool if I do say
so myself. And then there was the Peace of
Frey.’
‘The peace …’ I realized he meant the
shock wave that had disarmed everyone, but
I didn’t have time to worry about that. ‘Fine.
Yes. We have to act now.’
I grabbed the sword. My eyesight dimmed.
If I hadn’t been sitting already, I would’ve
fallen down. I fought against the nausea and
dizziness and placed the sword flat against
Halfborn’s chest.
Warmth flooded through me. Light turned
Halfborn’s beard to red gold. I sent the last
of my strength coursing through his veins,
repairing damage, closing ruptures.

955/1044

The next thing I remember, I was lying
face up on the deck, staring at a green sail
rippling in the wind as my friends shook me
and shouted my name.
Then I was standing in a sunlit meadow at
the edge of a lake with blue sky above me. A
warm breeze ruffled my hair.
Somewhere behind me, a man’s voice said,
‘Welcome.’

SIXTY-EIGHT

Don’t Be a No-Bro, Bro

He looked like a Hollywood Viking. He
looked more like Thor from the movies than
Thor did.
Blond hair fell to his shoulders. His tanned
face, blue eyes, hawkish nose and stubbly
beard would’ve worked equally well on the
red carpet or the beaches of Malibu.
He reclined on a throne of living tree
branches, the seat draped with deer hide.
Across his lap lay a sort of sceptre – a stag’s
antler fitted with a leather grip.
When he smiled, I saw my own self-conscious smirk, the same crooked chin. He

958/1044

even had the same cowlick I always got
above my right ear.
I understood why my mom would’ve fallen
in love with him. It wasn’t just because he
was handsome, or because his faded jeans,
flannel shirt and hiking boots were exactly
her style. He radiated warmth and tranquility. Every time I’d healed someone, every
time I’d called on the power of Frey, I’d captured a fragment of this guy’s aura.
‘Dad,’ I said.
‘Magnus.’ Frey rose. His eyes twinkled, but
he didn’t seem sure what to do with his arms.
‘I’m so glad to see you at last. I’d – I’d give
you a hug, but I imagine that would not be
welcome. I understand you need more time
–’
I charged in and gave him a bear hug.
That wasn’t like me. I’m not a hugger, especially not with strangers.

959/1044

But he wasn’t a stranger. I knew him as
well as I knew my mother. For the first time,
I understood why my mom had been so insistent on taking me hiking and camping.
Every time we were in the woods on a summer day, every time the sun came out from
behind the clouds, Frey had been there.
Maybe I should have resented him, but I
didn’t. After losing my mother, I didn’t have
patience for grudges. My years on the street
had taught me that it was pointless to whine
and moan about what you could’ve had –
what you deserved, what was fair. I was just
happy to have this moment.
He cupped his hand gently on the back of
my head. He smelled of campfire smoke,
pine needles and toasted s’mores. Did they
have s’mores in Vanaheim?
It occurred to me why I must be here. I
was dead. Or at least dying again.
I pulled away. ‘My friends –’

960/1044

‘Are safe,’ Frey assured me. ‘You pushed
yourself to the verge of death healing the
berserker, but he will live. So will you. You
have done well, Magnus.’
His praise made me uncomfortable. ‘Three
Valkyries died. I almost lost every friend I
had. All I did was bind the wolf with a new
rope and send Surt back to Muspellheim –
and Jack did all that work. It doesn’t really
change anything.’
Frey laughed. ‘Magnus, you have changed
everything. You, the wielder of the sword,
are shaping the destiny of the Nine Worlds.
As for the deaths of the Valkyries – that was
a sacrifice they willingly made. Do not dishonour them by feeling guilt. You cannot
prevent every death, any more than I can
prevent each summer from becoming autumn … or any more than I can prevent my
own fate at Ragnarok.’

961/1044

‘Your fate …’ I closed my fingers around
the runestone, now back on its chain. ‘I have
your sword. Couldn’t you …?’
Frey shook his head. ‘No, son. As your
Aunt Freya told you, I can never wield the
Sword of Summer again. Ask the sword, if
you want to be sure.’
I pulled off the pendant. Jack sprang to
life, spewing a tirade of insults I can’t really
repeat.
‘And another thing!’ he yelled. ‘Giving me
away so you could marry a giantess? Dude,
what was that? Blades before babes, you
know what I’m saying?’
Frey smiled sadly. ‘Hello, old friend.’
‘Oh, we’re friends again?’ the sword demanded. ‘Nah. Nuh-uh. We’re done.’ Jack
paused. ‘Your son’s okay, though. I like him.
As long as he’s not planning to trade me for a
giantess’s hand in marriage.’
‘That’s not on my to-do list,’ I promised.

962/1044

‘Then we’re cool. But as for this sorry father of yours, this traitorous no-bro –’
I willed the sword back to pendant form.
‘No-bro?’
Frey shrugged. ‘I made my choice long
ago. I surrendered the blade for the sake of
love.’
‘But on Ragnarok you’ll die because you
don’t have it.’
He held up the deer antler. ‘I will fight
with this.’
‘An animal horn?’
‘Knowing your fate is one thing. Accepting
it is another. I will do my duty. With this
antler I will slay many giants, even Beli, one
of their great generals. But you’re right. It
won’t be enough to bring down Surt. In the
end, I will die.’
‘How can you be so calm about it?’
‘Magnus … even gods can’t last forever. I
don’t expend my energy trying to fight the

963/1044

change of seasons. I focus on making sure
the days I have, and the season I oversee, are
as joyful, rich and plentiful as possible.’ He
touched my face. ‘But you already understand this. No child of Thor or Odin or even
noble Tyr could have withstood Hel’s promises, Loki’s silver words. You did. Only a son
of Frey, with the Sword of Summer, could
choose to let go as you did.’
‘Letting go … My mom …’
‘Yes.’ Frey retrieved something from his
throne – a sealed ceramic jar about the size
of a heart. He placed it in my hands. ‘You
know what she would want?’
I couldn’t speak. I nodded, hoping my expression told Frey how grateful I was.
‘You, my son, will bring hope to the Nine
Worlds. You have heard the term Indian
summer? You will be our last such season – a
chance for warmth, light and growth before
the long winter of Ragnarok.’

964/1044

‘But …’ I cleared my throat. ‘But no
pressure.’
Frey flashed his brilliant white teeth. ‘Exactly. Much needs to be done. The Aesir and
Vanir are scattered. Loki grows stronger.
Even in his bonds, he has played us against
each other, distracted us, made us lose focus.
I am guilty of becoming distracted as well.
For too long I have been removed from the
world of men. Only your mother managed to
…’ He focused on the jar in my hands. ‘Well,
after my big speech about not holding on to
the past …’ He smiled ruefully. ‘She was a vibrant soul. She would be proud of you.’
‘Dad …’ I wasn’t sure what else to say.
Maybe I just wanted to try out the word
again. I’d never had much experience using
it. ‘I don’t know if I’m up to this.’
From the pocket of his flannel shirt, he
pulled a tattered piece of paper – the MISSING
flyer Annabeth and her dad had been

965/1044

distributing on the day I died. Frey handed it
to me. ‘You will not be alone. For now, rest,
my son. I promise it won’t be another sixteen
years before we meet again. In the meantime, you should call your cousin. You
should talk. You will need her help before all
is said and done.’
That sounded ominous, but I didn’t get the
chance to ask about it. I blinked and Frey
was gone. I was sitting in the longship again,
holding the flyer and the ceramic jar. Next to
me sat Halfborn Gunderson, sipping from a
cup of mead.
‘Well.’ He gave me a bloody grin. Most of
his wounds had faded to scar tissue. ‘I owe
you my life. How about I buy you dinner?’
I blinked and looked around us. Our ship
had docked in Valhalla, on one of the rivers
that ran through the lobby. How we’d got
there, I had no idea. My other friends stood
on the wharf, speaking with Helgi the hotel

966/1044

manager – grim faces all around as they regarded the off-loaded bodies of the three
dead Valkyries.
‘What’s going on?’ I asked.
Halfborn drained his cup. ‘We’ve been
summoned to the feast hall to explain
ourselves before the thanes and the host of
einherjar. I hope they let us eat before they
kill us again. I’m starving.’

SIXTY-NINE

Oh … So That’s Who
Fenris Smelled in
Chapter Sixty-Three

We must have lost an entire day returning to
Valhalla, because dinner was under way in
the Feast Hall of the Slain. Valkyries flew
around with mead pitchers. Einherjar threw
bread and roasted Saehrimnir at each other.
Clusters of musicians jammed out all over
the room.
The fiesta slowly quietened as our procession made its way towards the thanes’ table.
An honour guard of Valkyries carried the
bodies of Gunilla, Irene and Margaret,
covered with white linen, on stretchers. I had

970/1044

hoped the fallen might come back to life
when they reached Valhalla. Couldn’t
Valkyries become einherjar? But it didn’t
happen.
Mallory, X, T.J. and Halfborn followed the
litters. Sam, Blitzen, Hearth and I brought
up the caboose.
Warriors glared at us as we passed. The
Valkyries’ expressions were even worse. I
was surprised we weren’t killed before we
reached the thanes. I suppose the crowd
wanted to see us publicly humiliated. They
didn’t know what we’d done. They just knew
we were escaped rogues brought back for
judgement, following the bodies of three
Valkyries. We weren’t shackled, but I still
shuffled along as if the rope Andskoti was
wrapped around my ankles. I cradled the
ceramic jar in the crook of my arm.
Whatever else happened, I couldn’t lose that.

971/1044

We stopped in front of the thanes’ table.
Erik, Helgi, Leif and all the other Eriks
looked grim. Even my old buddy Hunding
the bellhop stared at me with shock and disappointment, as if I’d taken away his
chocolate.
Helgi finally spoke. ‘Explain.’
I saw no reason to hold anything back. I
didn’t speak loudly, but my words echoed
through the hall. When I got to the fight with
Fenris, my voice failed me. Sam picked up
the story.
When she was done, the thanes sat silently. I couldn’t read their mood. Perhaps
they were more unsure now than angry, but
it didn’t matter. Despite my talk with my
father, I didn’t feel proud of what we’d accomplished. I was only alive because the
three Valkyries in front of me had kept the
fire giants at bay while we chained the wolf.

972/1044

No punishment from the thanes could make
me feel worse than that.
Finally Helgi rose. ‘This is the most serious
matter to come before this table in many
years. If you speak truly, you have done
deeds worthy of warriors. You have stopped
Fenris Wolf from breaking free. You have
sent Surt back to Muspellheim. But you acted as rogues – without the leave of the
thanes and in … questionable company.’ He
glanced distastefully at Hearth, Blitz and
Sam. ‘Loyalty, Magnus Chase … loyalty to
Valhalla is everything. The thanes must discuss all this in private before passing judgement, unless Odin wishes to intercede.’
He glanced at the vacant wooden throne,
which of course stayed empty. Perched on
the backrest, the ravens fixed me with their
glittering black eyes.
‘Very well,’ Helgi sighed. ‘We –’

973/1044

To my left, a booming voice said, ‘Odin
wishes to intercede.’
Nervous murmurs rippled through the
feast hall. X raised his stone-grey face towards the thanes.
‘X,’ T.J. whispered, ‘this is no time for
jokes.’
‘Odin wishes to intercede,’ said the halftroll stubbornly.
His appearance changed. His huge trollish
shape dropped away like camouflage fabric.
In X’s place stood a man who looked like a
retired drill sergeant. He was barrel-chested,
with massive arms stuffed in a short-sleeve
Hotel Valhalla polo shirt. His grey hair was
close-cropped, his beard cut square to accentuate his hardened, weathered face. A black
patch covered his left eye. His right eye was
dark blue, the colour of vein blood. At his
side hung a sword so massive it made Jack
the pendant tremble on his chain.

974/1044

The man’s name tag read: ODIN, ALL-FATHER,
OWNER AND FOUNDER.
‘Odin.’ Sam dropped to one knee.
The god smiled down at her. Then he gave
me what I thought was a conspiratorial wink,
though it was hard to tell, since he had only
one eye.
His name rippled through the feast hall.
The einherjar got to their feet. The thanes
rose and bowed deeply.
Odin, formerly the half-troll known as X,
marched around the table and took his place
on the throne. The two ravens landed on his
shoulders and pecked affectionately at his
ears.
‘Well!’ Odin’s voice boomed. ‘What does a
god have to do to get a cup of mead around
here?’

SEVENTY

We Are Subjected to the
PowerPoint of Doom

Odin got his drink, offered some toasts, then
began pacing in front of his throne, talking
about where he’d been and what he’d been
doing the past few decades. I was too
shocked to register much of Odin’s speech. I
think most of the einherjar felt the same way.
The room only began to unfreeze when
Odin summoned up the glowing Valkyrie-Vision screens. Einherjar blinked and stirred as
if coming out of mass hypnosis.

977/1044

‘I am a seeker of knowledge!’ Odin announced. ‘This has always been true. I hung
from the World Tree for nine days and
nights, racked with pain, in order to discover
the secret of runes. I stood in line in a blizzard for six days to discover the sorcery of
the smartphone.’
‘What?’ I muttered.
Blitzen coughed. ‘Just roll with it.’
‘And more recently,’ Odin announced, ‘I
endured seven weeks of motivational-speaker training at a hotel in Peoria to discover …
this!’
A clicker appeared in his hand. On all the
magical screens, a PowerPoint title slide
glowed, with a whirling emblem that read:
ODIN’S PLAN: HOW TO HAVE A HIGHLY SUCCESSFUL
AFTERLIFE!

‘What is going on?’ I whispered to Sam.

978/1044

‘Odin is always trying different things,’ she
said. ‘Looking in new places for knowledge.
He is very wise, but …’
Hearthstone signed as discreetly as possible: This is why I work for Mimir.
‘So you see,’ Odin continued, pacing back
and forth, his ravens flapping their wings for
balance, ‘everything these heroes have done,
they did with my knowledge and my permission. I have been with them the entire time –
either in person or in spirit.’
The screen changed. Odin started lecturing
through some bullet points. My eyes kind of
glazed over, but he talked about why he’d
hidden in Valhalla as X the half-troll:
‘To see how you would welcome such a
warrior and how you would carry out your
duties when you didn’t think I was around.
You all need to work on your positive empowerment and self-actualization.’

979/1044

He explained why he’d chosen Samirah alAbbas as a Valkyrie:
‘If the daughter of Loki can show such
bravery, why can’t we all? Samirah demonstrates the seven heroic qualities I’ll be highlighting in my upcoming book, Seven Heroic
Qualities, which will be available in the Valhalla gift shop.’
He explained why the Norns’ prophecy
didn’t mean what we thought it did:
‘Wrongly chosen, wrongly slain,’ he recited. ‘Magnus Chase was wrongly chosen by
Loki – who thought this boy could be easily
influenced. Instead, Magnus Chase proved
himself a true hero!’
Despite the compliment, I liked Odin better as a taciturn half-troll than as a motivational speaker. The dinner crowd didn’t seem
sure what to make of him either, though
some of the thanes were dutifully taking
notes.

980/1044

‘Which brings us to the affirmations portion of this presentation.’ Odin advanced his
slide show. A photograph of Blitzen popped
up. It had obviously been taken during the
crafting contest with Junior. Sweat streamed
down Blitzen’s face. His expression was agonized, as if somebody had just dropped a
hammer on his foot.
‘Blitzen, son of Freya!’ Odin said. ‘This
noble dwarf won the rope Andskoti, which
rebound Fenris Wolf. He followed his heart,
mastered his fears and served my old friend
Mimir faithfully. For your heroism, Blitzen,
you shall be released from Mimir’s service
and given funding to open the shop you have
always wanted. Because I have to say …’ Odin waved his hand over his hotel polo shirt.
Suddenly he was wearing a chain-mail waistcoat. ‘I picked up your prototype after the
contest, and it’s a very fine fashion

981/1044

statement. Any warrior would be wise to acquire one!’
The einherjar murmured in approval.
Some oohed and ahhed.
Blitzen bowed deeply. ‘Thank you, Lord
Odin. I am – I can’t begin to – Could I use
that endorsement for my product line?’
Odin smiled benevolently. ‘Of course. And
next we have Hearthstone the elf!’
Hearth’s photo appeared on the screens.
He was slumped in the window of Geirrod’s
palace. He had a silly grin on his face. His
hands were making the sign for washing
machine.
‘This noble creature risked everything to
rediscover rune magic. He is the first true
sorcerer to appear from the mortal realms in
centuries. Without him, the quest to restrain
the Wolf would have failed many times over.’
Odin beamed down at the elf. ‘My friend, you
also shall be released from Mimir’s service. I

982/1044

will personally bring you to Asgard, where I
will teach you the runes in a ninety-minute
one-on-one free tutoring session, accompanied by a DVD and signed copy of my book
Rune Magic with the All-Father.’
Polite clapping.
Hearthstone looked stunned. He managed
to sign, Thank you.
The screen changed. In Sam’s photo, she
was standing nervously at the counter of
Fadlan’s Falafel, her face turned aside,
blushing furiously as Amir leaned towards
her, grinning.
‘Ooooooo,’ said the crowd of einherjar, followed by a fair amount of snickering.
‘Kill me now,’ Sam muttered. ‘Please.’
‘Samirah al-Abbas!’ Odin said. ‘I personally chose you to be a Valkyrie because of
your courage, your resilience, your potential
greatness. Many here mistrusted you, but
you rose to the challenge. You followed my

983/1044

orders. You did your duty even when you
were reviled and exiled. To you, I give a
choice.’
Odin regarded the fallen Valkyries who lay
before the thanes’ table. He allowed a respectful silence to fall across the room.
‘Gunilla, Margaret, Irene – all knew the
risks of being a Valkyrie. All gave their lives
to make today’s victory possible. In the end,
they saw your true worth, and they fought at
your side. I believe they would agree you
should be reinstated as a Valkyrie.’
Sam’s knees almost gave out. She had to
lean on Mallory Keen for support.
‘I offer you a choice of jobs,’ Odin continued. ‘I need a captain for my Valkyries. I can
think of no one better than you. This would
allow you more time to spend in the mortal
world, perhaps a chance to rest after your
harrowing quest. Or –’ his blue eye gleamed
– ‘you could choose a much more dangerous

984/1044

assignment, working directly for me as the
need arises on other, shall we say, high-risk,
high-reward missions.’
Sam bowed. ‘All-Father, you honour me. I
could never replace Gunilla. All I ask for is
the chance to prove myself, as many times as
necessary, until no one here has any doubt of
my loyalties to Valhalla. I will take the more
dangerous assignment. Command me, and I
will not fail.’
This went down pretty well with the
crowd. The einherjar applauded. Some
shouted approval. Even the other Valkyries
regarded Sam with less hostile expressions.
‘Very well,’ Odin said. ‘Once again,
Samirah, you prove your wisdom. We will
speak later of your duties. And now … Magnus Chase.’
The screens changed. There I was: frozen
mid-scream as I fell from the Longfellow
Bridge. ‘Son of Frey, you retrieved the Sword

985/1044

of Summer. You kept it from the grip of Surt.
You have proven yourself … well, perhaps
not a great warrior –’
‘Thanks,’ I muttered.
‘– but certainly a great einherji. I think we
are in agreement – all of us here at the
thanes’ table – that you, too, deserve a
reward.’
Odin glanced to his left and right. The
thanes stirred, hastily muttering, ‘Yes. Um.
Absolutely.’
‘I do not offer this lightly,’ Odin said. ‘But
if you still feel that Valhalla is not your place
I will send you to Folkvanger, where your
aunt holds court. As a child of the Vanir, perhaps that would be more to your liking. Or –’
his blue eye seemed to pierce right through
me – ‘if you wish, I will even allow you to return to the mortal world and be released
from your duties as an einherji.’

986/1044

The room filled with murmuring and tension. From the faces of the crowd, I could tell
this was an unusual offer. Odin was taking a
risk. If he set a precedent of letting einherjar
return to the world, wouldn’t others want to
go too?
I looked at Sam and Blitzen and Hearthstone. I looked at my hallmates from floor
nineteen – T.J., Halfborn, Mallory. For the
first time in years, I didn’t feel homeless.
I bowed to Odin. ‘Thank you, All-Father.
But wherever these friends of mine are –
that’s my home. I am one of the einherjar. I
am one of your warriors. That is reward
enough.’
The whole dining hall erupted in cheering.
Goblets banged on tables. Swords clattered
against shields. My friends surrounded me,
hugging me and clapping me on the
shoulders. Mallory kissed my cheek and said,

987/1044

‘You are a huge idiot.’ Then she whispered in
my ear, ‘Thank you.’
Halfborn ruffled my hair. ‘We’ll make you
a warrior yet, Frey-son.’
When the cheering died down, Odin raised
his hand. His clicker elongated into a glowing white spear.
‘By Gungnir, the hallowed weapon of the
All-Father, I declare that these seven heroes
shall have full rights of passage through the
Nine Worlds, including Valhalla. Wherever
they go, they shall go in my name, serving
the will of Asgard. Let no one interfere on
pain of death!’ He lowered his spear. ‘Tonight, we feast in their honour. Tomorrow,
our fallen comrades shall be given to water
and flame!’

SEVENTY-ONE

We Burn a Swan Boat,
Which I’m Pretty Sure Is
Illegal

The funeral was held on the pond in the
Public Garden. Somehow, the einherjar had
got possession of a swan boat – the kind that
normally don’t ply the waters during the
winter. They’d modified the boat, turning it
into a floating funeral pyre for the three
Valkyries. The bodies were wrapped in white
and laid on a bed of wood, with weapons and
armour and gold heaped around them.

990/1044

The pond was frozen over. There shouldn’t
have been any way to launch the boat, but
the einherjar had brought along a friend – a
fifteen-foot-tall giantess named Hyrokkin.
Despite the weather, Hyrokkin was
dressed in cut-off shorts and an XXXXL Tshirt from the Boston Rowing Club. Before
the ceremony, she stomped barefoot all over
the pond, breaking the ice and scaring the
ducks. Then she came back and waited respectfully at the shore, her shins glazed with
freezing water, while einherjar came forward
to say their goodbyes to the fallen. Many left
weapons, coins or other keepsakes on the funeral pyres. Some spoke about how Gunilla,
Margaret or Irene had been responsible for
bringing them to Valhalla.
Finally Helgi lit the fire. Hyrokkin pushed
the boat into the pond.
There were no pedestrians in the Public
Garden. Maybe magic kept them away. If any

991/1044

had been around, maybe some glamour
would’ve kept them from seeing the crowd of
undead warriors watching a ship burn.
My eyes drifted to the spot under the
bridge where two weeks ago I’d been alive,
homeless and miserable. Only now could I
admit how terrified I’d felt all the time.
The boat roared into a column of fire, obscuring the bodies of the Valkyries. Then the
flames vanished as if somebody had turned
off the gas, leaving no trace of the boat – just
a steaming circle in the pond.
Mourners turned and drifted through the
park, heading towards the Hotel Valhalla on
Beacon Street.
T.J. gripped my shoulder. ‘You coming,
Magnus?’
‘In a bit.’
As my hallmates headed back home, I was
happy to see Halfborn Gunderson slip his

992/1044

arm around Mallory Keen’s waist. She didn’t
even cut his hand off for doing so.
Blitzen, Hearth, Sam and I stayed behind,
watching steam curl off the pond.
Finally Hearth signed, I am going to Asgard. Thank you, Magnus.
I’d seen the envious looks some of the einherjar had given him. For decades, maybe
centuries, no mortal had been allowed to visit the city of the gods. Now Odin had agreed
to teach an elf.
‘That’s awesome, man,’ I said. ‘But listen –
don’t forget to come back and visit, huh?
You’ve got a family now.’
Hearthstone smiled. He signed, I hear
you.
‘Oh, he’ll visit, all right,’ Blitzen said. ‘He’s
promised to help me move into my new
store. I’m not lugging all those boxes without
some magic assistance!’

993/1044

I felt happy for Blitz, though it was hard to
think about yet another one of my friends
going away. ‘I’m sure you’ll have the best
shop in Nidavellir.’
Blitzen snorted. ‘Nidavellir? Bah. Dwarves
don’t deserve my fashion brilliance. That red
gold from Odin will buy me a nice storefront
on Newbury Street. Blitzen’s Best will be
open in the spring, so you have absolutely no
excuse not to come by and get fitted for one
of these.’ He brushed aside his overcoat, revealing a glittering, stylish bulletproof
waistcoat.
I couldn’t help it. I gave Blitzen a hug.
‘All right, kid, all right.’ He patted me on
the back. ‘Let’s not wrinkle the fabric.’
Sam grinned. ‘Maybe you can make a new
hijab for me. The old one got kind of ripped
to shreds.’

994/1044

‘I’ll make it for you at cost, with more magical properties!’ Blitzen promised. ‘And I
have some ideas for colours.’
‘You’re the expert,’ Sam said. ‘As for me,
I’ve got to get home. I’m grounded. I have a
pile of make-up work from school.’
‘And you have a boyfriend to deal with,’ I
said.
She blushed, which was kind of cute. ‘He’s
not … All right, fine. Yes, I should probably
deal with that, whatever that means.’ She
poked me in the chest. ‘Thanks to you, I can
fly again. That’s the main thing. Try not to
die too often until I see you again.’
‘When will that be?’
‘Soon,’ Sam promised. ‘Odin wasn’t kidding about the high-risk assignments. The
good news is –’ she put a finger to her lips –
‘I can pick my own strike force. So all of you
… consider yourselves warned.’

995/1044

I wanted to hug her, to tell her how much I
appreciated everything she’d done, but I
knew Sam wouldn’t be comfortable with
that. I settled for a smile. ‘Any time, al-Abbas. Now that Odin has given us permission
to travel the worlds, maybe I can come visit
you in Dorchester.’
‘That,’ she said, ‘is a truly mortifying idea.
My grandparents would kill me. Amir would
–’
‘Okay, jeez,’ I said. ‘Just remember: you’re
not in this alone.’
‘Noted.’ She bumped me with her elbow.
‘And what about you, Magnus – back to Valhalla for the feast? Your hallmates have been
singing your praises. I even heard a few
Valkyries speculating that you might be
made a thane one of these centuries.’
I smiled, but I wasn’t ready to think about
one of these centuries. I gazed across the
Public Garden. A taxi was just pulling up in

996/1044

front of the Cheers bar on the corner of
Beacon and Brimmer. The ceramic jar
weighed heavily inside my winter coat.
‘First I have an appointment,’ I said. ‘I
have to keep a promise.’
I said goodbye to my friends. Then I went
to meet my cousin.

SEVENTY-TWO

I Lose a Bet

‘This is way better than the last memorial I
attended,’ Annabeth said. ‘Yours.’
We stood on a ridge in the Blue Hills,
watching my mother’s ashes drift across the
snowy trees. Far below, the sun glittered on
Houghton’s Pond. The day was cold, but I
didn’t feel uncomfortable. I felt warm and
calm – more right than I’d felt in years.
I tucked the empty ceramic jar under my
arm.
‘Thanks for coming with me,’ I said.
Annabeth’s grey eyes studied me, the same
way she seemed to study everything –

999/1044

assessing not just my appearance, but my
composition, my stress points, my potential
for renovation. This was a girl, after all, who
had made Parthenon models out of runestones when she was six years old.
‘Glad to,’ she said. ‘Your mom … from
what I remember, she was great.’
‘She would’ve liked the fact that you’re
here.’
Annabeth gazed across the treeline. Her
face looked sunburned from the wind. ‘They
cremated you, too, you know. I mean that
other body … whatever that was. Your ashes
were placed in the family mausoleum. I
didn’t even know we had a family
mausoleum.’
I shuddered, imagining those ashes in a
porcelain vase in a dank stone cubbyhole.
Much better to be here, in the fresh air and
the frigid sunlight.

1000/1044

‘Pretending I was dead couldn’t have been
easy for you,’ I said.
She brushed a strand of hair from her face.
‘The service was harder on Randolph, I
think. He seemed pretty shaken up, considering, you know …’
‘That he never cared about me?’
‘Or any of us. My dad, though … Magnus,
that was difficult. He and I have had a rocky
history, but I’m trying to be honest with him
now. I don’t like hiding things.’
‘Sorry.’ I spread my hands. ‘I thought it
was better if I didn’t drag you into my problems. For the last few days, I wasn’t sure if I
was going to make it. Some … some dangerous things were happening. It had to do with
my father’s, uh, side of the family.’
‘Magnus, I might understand more than
you think I do.’
I thought about that. Annabeth did seem
more attuned, more grounded than most

1001/1044

people I talked to – even most of the people
in Valhalla. On the other hand, I didn’t want
to put her at risk, or threaten the tenuous relationship we were starting to reconstruct.
‘I’m okay now,’ I assured her. ‘I’m staying
with friends. It’s a good place, but it’s not the
kind of arrangement most people would understand. Uncle Randolph can’t know about
it. I’d appreciate it if you didn’t tell anyone,
not even your dad.’
‘Hmm,’ she said. ‘I don’t suppose I get
details?’
I thought about what Frey had told me:
You should talk. You will need her help before all is said and done. I remembered what
Sam had said about her own family – how
they’d attracted the attention of the gods for
generations. Randolph had hinted that our
family was the same way.

1002/1044

‘I just don’t want to put you in danger,’ I
said. ‘I kind of hoped you could be my one
connection to the regular world.’
Annabeth stared at me. She snorted and
began to laugh. ‘Wow. You have no idea how
funny that is.’ She took a deep breath. ‘Magnus, if you had any clue about how weird my
life is –’
‘Okay, but being here with you?’ I said.
‘This is the most normal I’ve felt in years.
After all the crazy fighting between our parents, the stupid grudges and years of not
speaking to each other, I was hoping we
could make our generation of the family not
so messed up.’
Annabeth’s expression turned serious.
‘That kind of normal I like.’ She extended her
hand. ‘To us, the Chase cousins. Here’s to being less messed up.’
We shook on it.

1003/1044

‘Now spill,’ she commanded. ‘Tell me
what’s been going on. I promise I won’t tell. I
might even be able to help. I also promise
that, whatever’s been going on with you, my
life is weirder. It’ll make yours look downright suburban.’
I considered everything I’d been through –
death and resurrection, fishing for the World
Serpent, fighting with giants, running from
monster squirrels, binding a wolf on a disappearing island.
‘How much you want to bet?’ I said.
‘Bring it on, cousin.’
‘Lunch?’ I suggested. ‘I know a great falafel
place.’
‘You’ve got a bet,’ she said. ‘Let’s hear what
you’ve been up to.’
‘Oh, no,’ I said. ‘Your story is so amazing?
You go first.’

Epilogue
Randolph hadn’t slept since his nephew’s funeral service.
Every day he visited the mausoleum, hoping for some sign, some miracle. He cried
real tears, but not for young Magnus. He
wept for everything he’d lost – everything
that might never be recovered now.
He came in through the back door of the
town house, his hands shaking so badly he
could barely work the lock. He removed his
snow boots and his heavy coat, then padded
upstairs, going over what he’d said to Magnus on the bridge for the millionth time,
wondering what he could have done
differently.

1005/1044

He froze in the doorway of his office. A
man in a priest’s frock was sitting on his
desk, dangling his feet.
‘Visiting the gravesite again?’ Loki
grinned. ‘Honestly, I thought the service
provided some excellent closure.’
‘You were the priest?’ Randolph sighed.
‘Of course you were the priest.’
Loki chuckled. ‘A young life cut short, but
let us celebrate his gifts and the impact he
had upon us … I was improvising, of course.
But that’s what I do best.’
Randolph had seen the god of lies a dozen
times before – when Loki had chosen to send
his essence to Midgard – but it was always a
shock – those brilliant eyes, the hair like
flames, the ruined lips and the scars across
his nose. He was unnaturally handsome and
unnaturally terrifying in equal measure.
‘You’ve come to kill me, I expect.’ Randolph tried to remain calm, but his heartbeat

1006/1044

still pulsed in his ears. ‘Why did you wait this
long?’
Loki spread his hands magnanimously. ‘I
didn’t want to be hasty. I needed to see how
things played out. It’s true you failed. I could
kill you, but you might still be useful. After
all, I still have something you want.’
The god rose from the desk and opened his
hand. Above his palm, flames flickered, consolidating into the miniature shapes of a woman and two girls. They writhed in the fire,
reaching out to Randolph, silently pleading.
Only Randolph’s cane kept him from collapsing. ‘Please. I tried. I didn’t – I didn’t anticipate the dwarf and the elf. Or that cursed
Valkyrie. You didn’t tell me –’
‘Randolph, my dear friend …’ Loki closed
his hand, extinguishing the fire. ‘I hope
you’re not making excuses?’
‘No, but –’

1007/1044

‘I’m the master of excuses. You’d have to
try really hard to impress me. Just tell me,
do you still want your family returned?’
‘Of – of course.’
‘Oh, good. How nice. Because I’m not done
with you. Nor am I done with that little boy
Magnus.’
‘But he has the sword. He stopped your
plan.’
‘He stopped one facet of my plan. Yes, it
was very educational.’ Loki stepped forward.
He cupped his hand on Randolph’s cheek –
an almost tender gesture. ‘I must say, your
nephew is impressive. I don’t see the family
resemblance at all.’
Randolph smelled the poison before he felt
it. Acrid steam curled into his nostrils. The
side of his face erupted in white-hot pain. He
fell to his knees, his throat seizing up in
shock. He tried to pull away, but Loki’s hand
stayed stuck in place.

1008/1044

‘There, there,’ Loki said soothingly. ‘It’s
just a little taste of my life – the snake venom
that is splashed in my face every day. Perhaps you can understand why it makes me a
tad grumpy.’
Randolph screamed until his throat was
raw.
‘I won’t kill you, old friend,’ Loki said. ‘But
I do punish failure. Absolutely!’
He took the hand away. Randolph
crumpled, weeping, the smell of burned flesh
in his nose.
‘Why …’ he croaked. ‘Why …?’
Loki raised his eyebrows in mock surprise.
‘Why what? Torture you? Continue to use
you? Fight against the gods? It is my nature,
Randolph! Now, don’t fuss. I’m sure you’ll
find a way to explain the horrible handshaped scar on your face. I think it lends you
a certain … gravitas. The Vikings will be
most impressed.’

1009/1044

Loki strolled to Randolph’s display cases.
He ran his fingers along Randolph’s collection of trinkets and talismans. ‘Ragnarok has
many triggers, my friend. The Sword of Summer is not the only weapon in play.’
He plucked a necklace from the display.
His eyes gleamed as the small silver hammer
pendant swung between his fingers.
‘Oh, yes, Randolph.’ Loki grinned. ‘You
and I are going to have lots of fun.’

Glossary
AEGIR – lord of the waves
AESIR – gods of war, close to humans
ALF SEIDR – elf magic
ANDSKOTI – the Adversary; the new, magic-infused
rope binding Fenris Wolf
BALDER – god of light; the second son of Odin and
Frigg, and twin brother of Hod. Frigg made all
earthly things swear to never harm her son, but she
forgot about mistletoe. Loki tricked Hod into killing
Balder with a dart made of mistletoe.
BIFROST – the rainbow bridge leading from Asgard to
Midgard
DRAUGR – Norse zombies
EIKTHRYMIR – a stag in the Tree of Laeradr whose
horns spray water non-stop that feeds every river in
every world
EINHERJAR (EINHERJI, sing.) – great heroes who
have died with bravery on Earth and become

1011/1044

soldiers in Odin’s eternal army; they train in Valhalla for Ragnarok, when the bravest of them will
join Odin against Loki and the giants in the battle at
the end of the world
FENRIS WOLF – an invulnerable wolf born of Loki’s
affair with a giantess; his mighty strength strikes
fear even in the gods, who keep him tied to a rock
on an island. He is destined to break free on the day
of Ragnarok.
FOLKVANGER – the Vanir afterlife for slain heroes,
ruled by the goddess Freya
FREY – the god of spring and summer, of the sun, the
rain and the harvest, and of abundance and fertility¸ growth and vitality. Frey is the twin brother of
Freya and, like his sister, is associated with great
beauty. He is lord of Alfheim.
FREYA – the goddess of love; twin sister of Frey; ruler
of Folkvanger
FRIGG – goddess of marriage and motherhood; Odin’s
wife and the queen of Asgard; mother of Balder and
Hod
GINNUNGAGAP – the primordial void; a mist that obscures appearances
GLEIPNIR – a golden rope made by dwarves to keep
Fenris Wolf in bondage

1012/1044

HEIDRUN – the goat in the Tree of Laeradr whose
milk is brewed for the magical mead of Valhalla
HEIMDALL – god of vigilance and the guardian of Bifrost, the gateway to Asgard
HEL – goddess of the dishonourable dead; born of
Loki’s affair with a giantess
HELHEIM – the underworld, ruled by Hel and inhabited by those who died in wickness, old age or
illness
HLIDSKJALF – the High Seat of Odin
HOD – Balder’s blind brother
HONIR – an Aesir god who, along with Mimir, traded
places with Vanir gods Frey and Njord at the end of
the war between the Aesir and the Vanir
IDUN – she distributes the apples of immortality that
keep the gods young and spry
JORMUNGAND – the World Serpent, born of Loki’s affair with a giantess; his body is so long it wraps
around the earth
JOTUN – Norse word for giant
LOKI – god of mischief, magic and artifice; the son of
two giants; adept at magic and shape-shifting. He is
alternately malicious and heroic to the Asgardian
gods and to humankind. Because of his role in the
death of Balder, Loki was chained by Odin to three

1013/1044

giant boulders with a poisonous serpent coiled over
his head. The venom of the snake occasionally irritates Loki’s face, and his writhing is the cause of
earthquakes.
LYNGVI – the Isle of Heather, where Fenris Wolf is
bound; the island’s location shifts every year as the
branches of Yggdrasil sway in the winds of the void.
It only surfaces during the first full moon of each
year.
MAGNI AND MODI – Thor’s favourite sons, fated to
survive Ragnarok
MIMIR – an Aesir god who, along with Honir, traded
places with Vanir gods Frey and Njord at the end of
the war between the Aesir and the Vanir. When the
Vanir didn’t like his counsel, they cut off his head
and sent it to Odin. Odin placed the head in a magical well, where the water brought it back to life,
and Mimir soaked up all the knowledge of the
World Tree.
MJOLNIR – Thor’s hammer
MUSPELL – fire
NAGLFAR – the Ship of Nails
NARVI – one of Loki’s sons, disembowelled by his
brother Vali, who was turned into a wolf after Loki
killed Balder

1014/1044

NIDHOGG – the dragon that lives at the bottom of the
World Tree and chews on its roots
NJORD – god of ships, sailors and fishermen; father
of Frey and Freya
NORNS – three sisters who control the destinies of
both gods and humans
NORUMBEGA – a lost Norse settlement in their furthest point of exploration
ODIN – the ‘All-Father’ and king of the gods; the god
of war and death, but also poetry and wisdom. By
trading one eye for a drink from the Well of Wisdom, Odin gained unparallelled knowledge. He has
the ability to observe all the Nine Worlds from his
throne in Asgard; in addition to his great hall, he
also resides in Valhalla with the bravest of those
slain in battle.
RAGNAROK – the Day of Doom or Judgement, when
the bravest of the einherjar will join Odin against
Loki and the giants in the battle at the end of the
world
RAN – goddess of the sea; wife of Aegir
RATATOSK – an invulnerable squirrel that constantly
runs up and down the World Tree carrying insults
between the eagle that lives at the top and Nidhogg,
the dragon that lives at the roots

1015/1044

RED GOLD – the currency of Asgard and Valhalla
SAEHRIMNIR – the magical beast of Valhalla; every
day it is killed and cooked for dinner and every
morning it is resurrected; it tastes like whatever the
diner wants
SESSRUMNIR – the Hall of Many Seats; Freya’s mansion in Folkvanger
SKIRNIR – a god; Frey’s servant and messenger
SLEIPNIR – Odin’s eight-legged steed; one of Loki’s
children. Only Odin can summon him
SUMARBRANDER – the Sword of Summer
SURT – lord of Muspellheim
SVARTALF – a dark elf; a subset of dwarves
THANE – a lord of Valhalla
THOR – god of thunder; son of Odin. Thunderstorms
are the earthly effects of Thor’s mighty chariot rides
across the sky, and lightning is caused by him hurling his great hammer, Mjolnir.
TREE OF LAERADR – a tree in the centre of the Feast
Hall of the Slain in Valhalla containing immortal
animals that have particular jobs
TYR – god of courage, law, and trial by combat; he
lost a hand to Fenris’s bite when the Wolf was restrained by the gods
ULLER – the god of snowshoes and archery

1016/1044

UTGARD-LOKI – the most powerful sorcerer of Jotunheim; king of the mountain giants
VALA – a seer
VALHALLA – paradise for warriors in the service of
Odin
VALI – Loki’s son, who was turned into a wolf after
Loki killed Balder; as a wolf he disembowelled his
brother Narvi before he was gutted himself
VALKYRIE – Odin’s handmaidens, who choose slain
heroes to bring to Valhalla
VANIR – gods of nature; close to elves
YGGDRASIL – the World Tree
YMIR – the largest of the giants; father to both the giants and the gods. He was killed by Odin and his
brothers, who used his flesh to create Midgard. This
act was the genesis of the cosmic hatred between
the gods and the giants.

THE NINE WORLDS

ASGARD – the home of the Aesir
VANAHEIM – the home of the Vanir
ALFHEIM – the home of the light elves
MIDGARD – the home of humans
JOTUNHEIM – the home of the giants
NIDAVELLIR – the home of the dwarves
NIFLHEIM – the world of ice, fog and mist
MUSPELLHEIM – the home of the fire giants
and demons

1018/1044

HELHEIM – the home of Hel and the dishonourable dead

RUNES (IN ORDER OF APPEARANCE)

DAGAZ – new beginnings, transformations

THURISAZ – the rune of Thor

FEHU – the rune of Frey

RAIDHO – the wheel, the journey

PERTHRO – the empty cup

1020/1044

EHWAZ – horse, transportation

ALGIZ – shielding

TIWAZ – the rune of Tyr

COMING AUTUMN 2016

1022/1044

www.rickriordan.co.uk

THE ADVENTURE
NEVER STOPS …

THE GREEK GODS ARE ALIVE AND KICKING!

They still fall in love with mortals and
bear children with immortal blood in
their veins. Those kids who learn the
truth about their parentage must
travel to Camp Half-Blood – a secret

1024/1044

base dedicated to the training of demigods. From there, young heroes like
Percy Jackson, the son of Poseidon,
embark on dangerous quests to prove
their bravery.
The Percy Jackson series:
PERCY JACKSON AND THE LIGHTNING THIEF
PERCY JACKSON AND THE SEA OF MONSTERS
PERCY JACKSON AND THE TITAN’S CURSE
PERCY JACKSON AND THE BATTLE OF THE
LABYRINTH
PERCY JACKSON AND THE LAST OLYMPIAN
THE DEMIGOD FILES
PERCY JACKSON AND THE GREEK GODS
PERCY JACKSON AND THE GREEK HEROES

THE GODS OF EGYPT AWAKEN!

When an explosion shatters the ancient Rosetta Stone and unleashes Set,
the Egyptian god of chaos, only Carter
and Sadie Kane can save the day. Their
terrifying quest takes the pair around
the globe in search of the truth about
their family’s magical connection to
the gods of Ancient Egypt.
The Kane Chronicles series:
THE RED PYRAMID
THE THRONE OF FIRE
THE SERPENT’S SHADOW

PERCY JACKSON IS BACK!

Join Percy and his friends from Camp
Half-Blood as they face off against
rival Roman demigods of Camp
Jupiter, and set out on a deadly new
mission: to prevent the all-powerful
Earth Mother, Gaia, from awakening
from her millennia-long sleep to bring
about the end of the world.
The Heroes of Olympus series:
THE LOST HERO
THE SON OF NEPTUNE
THE MARK OF ATHENA

1027/1044

THE HOUSE OF HADES
THE BLOOD OF OLYMPUS
THE DEMIGOD DIARIES

THE GODS OF ASGARD ARISE!

Magnus Chase has always run away
from trouble, but trouble has a way of
finding him. After being killed in
battle with a fire giant, Magnus finds
himself resurrected in Valhalla as one
of the chosen warriors of the Norse
god Odin. But now isn’t a good time to
be joining Odin’s army. The gods of
Asgard are preparing for Ragnarok –
the Norse doomsday – and Magnus
has a leading role …

1029/1044

The Magnus Chase series:
THE SWORD OF SUMMER

www.rickriordan.co.uk

1031/1044

1032/1044

1033/1044

1034/1044

1035/1044

puffin.co.uk

WEB FUN
UNIQUE and exclusive digital content!
Podcasts, photos, Q&A, Day in the Life of, interviews and much more, from Eoin Colfer,
Cathy Cassidy, Allan Ahlberg and Meg Rosoff
to Lynley Dodd!

WEB NEWS
The Puffin Blog is packed with posts and
photos from Puffin HQ and special guest

1038/1044

bloggers. You can also sign up to our
monthly newsletter Puffin Beak Speak.

WEB CHAT
Discover something new EVERY month –
books, competitions and treats galore.

WEBBED FEET
(Puffins have funny little feet and brightly
coloured beaks.)

Point your mouse our
way today!

Puffin is over seventy years old.
Sounds ancient, doesn’t it? But Puffin has
never been so lively. We’re always on the
lookout for the next big idea, which is how it
began all those years ago.

1040/1044

Penguin Books was a big idea from the
mind of a man called Allen Lane, who in
1935 invented the quality paperback and
changed the world. And from great Penguins, great Puffins grew, changing
the face of children’s books forever.

The first four Puffin Picture Books were
hatched in 1940 and the first Puffin story
book featured a man with broomstick arms
called Worzel Gummidge. In 1967 Kaye
Webb, Puffin Editor, started the Puffin Club,
promising to ‘make children into readers’. She kept that promise and over
200,000 children became devoted Puffineers
through their quarterly instalments of Puffin
Post.

1041/1044

Many years from now, we hope you’ll look
back and remember Puffin with a smile. No
matter what your age or what you’re
into, there’s a Puffin for everyone. The
possibilities are endless, but one thing is for
sure: whether it’s a picture book or a paperback, a sticker book or a hardback, if it’s got
that little Puffin on it – it’s bound to be
good.

www.puffin.co.uk

PUFFIN BOOKS
UK | USA | Canada | Ireland | Australia
India | New Zealand | South Africa
Puffin Books is part of the Penguin Random House
group of companies whose addresses can be found at
global.penguinrandomhouse.com.
puffinbooks.com

First published in the USA by Disney • Hyperion, an
imprint of Disney Book Group, and in Great Britain
by Puffin Books 2015
Copyright © Rick Riordan, 2015
Illustrated by Rhett Podersoo
Rune art by Michelle Gengaro-Kokmen
Magnus Chase icon based on an illustration by Eamon
O’Donoghue

1043/1044

The moral right of the author and illustrators has
been asserted
All rights reserved
ISBN: 978-0-141-34243-6

@Created by PDF to ePub

